Always the caravan of sound made us halt   
to admire the swinging and the swift go-by   
of beasts with enormous hooves and heads   
beating the earth or reared against the sky. 
Do not reread, I mean glance ahead to see 
what has become of the colossal forms: 
everything happened at the instant of passing: 
the hoof-beat, the whinny, the bells on the harness,   
the creak of the wheels, the monkey’s fandango   
in double time over the elephant’s back. 
When the marching was over and we were free to go on   
there was never before us a dungfall or a track 
on the road-sands of any kind: 
only the motion of footprints being made 
crossing and recrossing in the trampled mind.
Past the fourth cloverleaf, by dwindling roads   
At last we came into the unleashed wind; 
The Chesapeake rose to meet us at a dead end   
Beyond the carnival wheels and gingerbread. 

Forsaken by summer, the wharf. The oil-green waves   
Flung yellow foam and sucked at disheveled sand.   
Small fish stank in the sun, and nervous droves   
Of cloud hastened their shadows over bay and land. 

Beyond the NO DUMPING sign in its surf of cans   
And the rotting boat with nettles to the rails,   
The horse dung garlanded with jeweling flies   
And papers blown like a fleet of shipless sails, 

We pushed into an overworld of wind and light   
Where sky unfettered ran wild from earth to noon,   
And the tethered heart broke loose and rose like a kite   
From sands that borrowed diamonds from the sun. 

We were empty and pure as shells that air-drenched hour,   
Heedless as waves that swell at the shore and fall,   
Pliant as sea-grass, the rapt inheritors 
Of a land without memory, where tide erases all.

The wooden scent of wagons,   
the sweat of animals—these places   
keep everything—breath of the cotton gin,   
black damp floors of the icehouse.   

Shadows the color of a mirror’s back   
break across faces.  The luck   
is always bad.  This light is brittle,   
old pale hair kept in a letter.   
The wheeze of porch swings and lopped gates   
seeps from new mortar.   

Wind from an axe that struck wood   
a hundred years ago   
lifts the thin flags of the town.   

Today the cloud shapes are terrifying,   
and I keep expecting some enormous   
black-and-white B-movie Cyclops   
to appear at the edge of the horizon, 

to come striding over the ocean   
and drag me from my kitchen   
to the deep cave that flickered   
into my young brain one Saturday 

at the Baronet Theater where I sat helpless   
between my older brothers, pumped up   
on candy and horror—that cave, 
the litter of human bones 

gnawed on and flung toward the entrance,   
I can smell their stench as clearly 
as the bacon fat from breakfast. This   
is how it feels to lose it— 

not sanity, I mean, but whatever it is   
that helps you get up in the morning 
and actually leave the house 
on those days when it seems like death 

in his brown uniform 
is cruising his panel truck 
of packages through your neighborhood.   
I think of a friend’s voice 

on her answering machine— 
Hi, I’m not here—
the morning of her funeral,   
the calls filling up the tape 

and the mail still arriving, 
and I feel as afraid as I was 
after all those vampire movies   
when I’d come home and lie awake 

all night, rigid in my bed, 
unable to get up 
even to pee because the undead   
were waiting underneath it; 

if I so much as stuck a bare 
foot out there in the unprotected air   
they’d grab me by the ankle and pull me   
under. And my parents said there was 

nothing there, when I was older   
I would know better, and now   
they’re dead, and I’m older,   
and I know better.


The morning after
my death
we will sit in cafés
but I will not
be there
I will not be
There was the great death of birds
the moon was consumed with
fire
the stars were visible
until noon.
Green was the forest drenched
with shadows
the roads were serpentine
A redwood tree stood
alone
with its lean and lit body
unable to follow the
cars that went by with
frenzy
a tree is always an immutable
traveller.
The moon darkened at dawn
the mountain quivered
with anticipation
and the ocean was double-shaded:
the blue of its surface with the
blue of flowers
mingled in horizontal water trails
there was a breeze to
witness the hour
The sun darkened at the
fifth hour of the
day
the beach was covered with
conversations
pebbles started to pour into holes
and waves came in like
horses.
The moon darkened on Christmas eve
angels ate lemons
in illuminated churches
there was a blue rug
planted with stars
above our heads
lemonade and war news
competed for our attention
our breath was warmer than
the hills.
There was a great slaughter of
rocks   of spring leaves
of creeks
the stars showed fully
the last king of the Mountain
gave battle
and got killed.
We lay on the grass
covered dried blood with our
bodies
green blades swayed between
our teeth.
We went out to sea
a bank of whales was heading
South
a young man among us a hero
tried to straddle one of the
sea creatures
his body emerged as a muddy pool
as mud
we waved goodbye to his remnants
happy not to have to bury
him in the early hours of the day
We got drunk in a barroom
the small town of Fairfax
had just gone to bed
cherry trees were bending under the
weight of their flowers:
they were involved in a ceremonial
dance to which no one
had ever been invited.
I know flowers to be funeral companions
they make poisons and venoms
and eat abandoned stone walls
I know flowers shine stronger
than the sun
their eclipse means the end of
times
but I love flowers for their treachery
their fragile bodies
grace my imagination’s avenues
without their presence
my mind would be an unmarked
grave.
We met a great storm at sea
looked back at the
rocking cliffs
the sand was going under
black birds were
leaving
the storm ate friends and foes
alike
water turned into salt for
my wounds.
Flowers end in frozen patterns
artificial gardens cover
the floors
we get up close to midnight
search with powerful lights
the tiniest shrubs on the
meadows
A stream desperately is running to
the ocean

my house’s stairway is seized
with vertigo.
Matter having forsaken its laws,
we land in hell,
ascending to heaven.
Shadows move along ladders
under the silence of ordinary things
there is another silence:
it belongs neither to the leaves not to the
dead
with a crown of birds circling him
a child is running in an abandoned 
house
the stairway takes the measure of
its own emptiness
I myself am the stairway that
Time has used in its
funeral course
wheels lift water in the 
gardens of Hama
and come down
not waiting for the river
to put out the fire
Here we are left with
the river Seine and Paris’s poisons.
I prefer gardens where
linden trees get ready for
a lunar voyage
The stairway that separates my
room from my memory
whispers in my ear . . .
I am not at the mercy of men
since trees live in my fantasies
men and trees long for fire
and call for the rain
I love rains which carry desires
to 
oceans.
Between one airplane and
another
space is disoriented
stars sneak into holes and brides
go naked to wells
their innocence wanes under
our eyes
You and I are made from a
worm-eaten wood
The Word has sunk
we are left with no cry   gesture
or gaze
silence to us is forbidden.
We are threatened neither by life
nor by death
nor forced to admire the Spring
I found earth-castles on the edge
of the desert’s torrents
I took their marble stairs
but could not find my way either
up or down
then I understood that I was
in a state of non-reason
and non-madness
and that the gardens of Andalusia
were standing
ready to die.
Two cities
Two tears
Let insanity keep between
its skirts
legs
within its black eyes
the fright of my adolescence
and the nocturnal walk on the hills:
which hill?
I mean the kingdom that a man carries
in his gut when 
his love’s fulfilled.
Two cities which are neither Beirut
nor Damascus
two tears: neither of alcohol nor of 
rain
Yes there has been a truck
and a blue-eyed woman
from Russia
—grey olive tree—
I was a butterfly caught by
a fire:
neither the day’s not the night’s
but the
incandescence that radiates
from the body like a
receding sickness,
Let tombs stay open!
The stairway which leads to my
room
borrows its metals from Babylon
The Prophet’s Ascension
had two movements
we fell into whirlpools
of mud
and the wind followed his horse
A tempest went after
the sun’s steps
The Prophet swam through waves
of clouds
a river of gold carried his
vessel
and away from the sun he reached Paradise
a Paradise made of light.
The stairway which leads to my room
leads to an observatory
I own two telescopes
to observe stars and black holes
and take mechanized stairs
which advance with no advance
my hair spins with
sunflowers
Illegitimate is this linden tree
which shakes by my door
let us get ready for Hell!
Cursed be messengers
tossing about water’s tranquility
and building forest fences
Oh that the wind go quicker than us!
that we be smothered by light!
This linden tree standing by my door
weights heavy on my days
I will finally marry it
and we shall bring children
condemned to terror
this tree looks at me
with insistence:
It will be kept waiting
until Time’s end.

In white pleated trousers, peering through green 
sunshades, looking for the way the sun is red 
noise, how locusts hiss to replicate the sun. 
What is the visual equivalent 
of syncopation? Rows of seared palms wrinkle 
in the heat waves through green glass. Sprinklers 
tick, tick, tick. The Watts Towers aim to split 
the sky into chroma, spires tiled with rubble 
nothing less than aspiration. I’ve left 
minarets for sun and syncopation, 
sixty-seven shades of green which I have 
counted, beginning: palm leaves, front and back, 
luncheon pickle, bottle glass, etcetera. 
One day I will comprehend the different   
grades of red. On that day I will comprehend 
these people, rhythms, jazz, Simon Rodia, 
Watts, Los Angeles, aspiration.

We pull off 
to a road shack 
in Massachusetts 
to watch men walk 
on the moon. We did   
the same thing 
for three two one 
blast off, and now 
we watch the same men   
bounce in and out 
of craters. I want 
a Coke and a hamburger. 
Because the men 
are walking on the moon   
which is now irrefutably   
not green, not cheese, 
not a shiny dime floating   
in a cold blue, 
the way I'd thought, 
the road shack people don't 
notice we are a black   
family not from there,   
the way it mostly goes.   
This talking through 
static, bounces in space- 
boots, tethered   
to cords is much   
stranger, stranger 
even than we are.

Portions of a mango tree the storm cut down, 
a green blaze bent into mud 
and they come to me, at dawn
three girls from Kanpur, far to the north admittedly 
(we know this from national geography class, 
the borders of states, the major cities).
They hung themselves from fans.
In the hot air they hung themselves
so that their father would not be forced to tender gold
he did not have, would not be forced
to work his fists to bone.
So that is how a portion of the story goes.
Slowly in the hot air they swung, three girls. 
How old were they?
Of marriageable age certainly.
Sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen, something of that sort.
How do I feel about it?
What a question! I am one of three sisters,
most certainly I do not want father to proffer money
he does not have for my marriage.
Get a scooter, a refrigerator, a horde of utensils,
silks, and tiny glittering bits of gold
to hang about my ears and throat.
Gold is labor time accumulated . . . labor time defined.
Who said that? Yes, I am a schoolteacher, fifth standard 
trained in Indian history and geography, 
Kerala University, first class first.
The storm tree puts out its limbs and
I see three girls swinging. One of them is me.
Step back I tell myself.
Saumiya, step back. The whole history 
of womankind is compacted here. 
Open your umbrella, tuck your sari tight,
breathe into the strokes of catastrophe,
and let the school bus wait.
You will get to it soon enough and the small, hot faces.
See how the monsoon winds soar and shunt 
tropic air into a house of souls, 
a doorway stopped by clouds.
Set your feet into broken stones 
and this red earth and pouring rain. 
For us there is no exile.

In the dog days of summer as muslin curls on its own heat 
And crickets cry in the black walnut tree
The wind lifts up my life
And sets it some distance from where it was.
Still Marco Polo Airport wore me out,
I slept in a plastic chair, took the water taxi.
Early, too early the voices of children 
Mimicking the clatter in the Internet café
In Campo Santo Stefano in a place of black coffee 
Bordellos of verse, bony accolades of joy,
Saint Stephen stooped over a cross,
A dog licking his heel, blood drops from a sign
By the church wall—Anarchia è ordine— 
The refugee from Istria gathers up nails.
She will cobble together a gondola with bits of driftwood
Cast off the shores of the hunger-bitten Adriatic.
In wind off the lagoon,
A child hops in numbered squares, back and forth, back and forth,
Cap on his head, rhymes cool as bone in his mouth. 
Whose child is he?
No one will answer me.
Voices from the music academy pour into sunlight
That strikes the malarial wealth of empire, 
Dreams of an old man in terrible heat,
Hands bound with coarse cloth, tethered to a scaffold, 
Still painting waves on the walls of the Palazzo Ducale.

Pretty women wonder where my secret lies. 
I’m not cute or built to suit a fashion model’s size   
But when I start to tell them, 
They think I’m telling lies. 
I say, 
It’s in the reach of my arms, 
The span of my hips,   
The stride of my step,   
The curl of my lips.   
I’m a woman 
Phenomenally. 
Phenomenal woman,   
That’s me. 
I walk into a room 
Just as cool as you please,   
And to a man, 
The fellows stand or 
Fall down on their knees.   
Then they swarm around me, 
A hive of honey bees.   
I say, 
It’s the fire in my eyes,   
And the flash of my teeth,   
The swing in my waist,   
And the joy in my feet.   
I’m a woman 
Phenomenally. 
Phenomenal woman, 
That’s me. 
Men themselves have wondered   
What they see in me. 
They try so much 
But they can’t touch 
My inner mystery. 
When I try to show them,   
They say they still can’t see.   
I say, 
It’s in the arch of my back,   
The sun of my smile, 
The ride of my breasts, 
The grace of my style. 
I’m a woman 
Phenomenally. 
Phenomenal woman, 
That’s me. 
Now you understand 
Just why my head’s not bowed.   
I don’t shout or jump about 
Or have to talk real loud.   
When you see me passing, 
It ought to make you proud. 
I say, 
It’s in the click of my heels,   
The bend of my hair,   
the palm of my hand,   
The need for my care.   
’Cause I’m a woman 
Phenomenally. 
Phenomenal woman, 
That’s me.

The eye follows, the land 
Slips upward, creases down, forms   
The gentle buttocks of a young   
Giant. In the nestle, 
Old adobe bricks, washed of   
Whiteness, paled to umber, 
Await another century. 
Star Jasmine and old vines 
Lay claim upon the ghosted land,   
Then quiet pools whisper   
Private childhood secrets. 
Flush on inner cottage walls   
Antiquitous faces, 
Used to the gelid breath 
Of old manors, glare disdainfully   
Over breached time. 
Around and through these   
Cold phantasmatalities,   
He walks, insisting 
To the languid air, 
Activity, music, 
A generosity of graces. 
His lupin fields spurn old 
Deceit and agile poppies dance 
In golden riot.   Each day is 
Fulminant, exploding brightly   
Under the gaze of his exquisite   
Sires, frozen in the famed paint   
Of dead masters. Audacious   
Sunlight casts defiance 
At their feet.

I can now confirm that I am not just fatter 
than everyone I work with, but I’m also fatter 
than all their spouses. Even the heavily bearded 
bear in accounting has a little otter-like boyfriend.
When my co-workers brightly introduce me 
as “the funny one in the office,” their spouses 
give them a look which translates to, Well, duh, 
then they both wait for me to say something funny.
A gaggle of models comes shrieking into the bar 
to further punctuate why I sometimes hate living 
in this city. They glitter, a shiny gang of scissors. 
I don’t know how to look like I’m not struggling.
Sometimes on the subway back to Queens, 
I can tell who’s staying on past the Lexington stop 
because I have bought their shoes before at Payless. 
They are shoes that fool absolutely no one.
Everyone wore their special holiday party outfits. 
It wasn’t until I arrived at the bar that I realized 
my special holiday party outfit was exactly the same 
as the outfits worn by the restaurant’s busboys.
While I’m standing in line for the bathroom, 
another patron asks if I’m there to clean it.

“must represent the governess   
for, of course, the creature itself   
could not inspire such terror.” 
staring at me fixedly, no   
trace of recognition. 
“when the window opened of its own accord.   
In the big walnut tree 
were six or seven wolves ... 
strained attention. They were white.”   
(The fear of cloudy skies.) 
like strangers! After five years 
Misgiving. Misdoubt. 
(The fear that one is dreaming.) 
The moon was shining, suddenly   
everything around me appeared   
(The fear of) 
unfamiliar. 
Wild vista 
inside or near the home. 
(Dread of bearing a monster.) 
If I failed to overlook the torn cushions, 
three teapots side by side,   
strewn towels, socks, papers— 
both foreign and stale.   
when I saw the frame was rotten,   
crumbling away from the glass, 
in spots, in other places still attached   
with huge globs of putty. 
The doctor forced me to repeat the word.   
Chimera. Cold feet. 
scared and unreal looking at buildings.   
The thin Victorians with scaly paint,   
their flimsy backporches linked 
by skeletal stairways. 
After five years 
(The fear that you are not at home.) 
I was sitting in the alcove where I never sit   
when I noticed a single eye, 
crudely drawn in pencil,   
in a corner near the floor. 
The paint was blistering— 
beneath it I saw white. 
Sparrows settle on the sagging wires.   
(Fear of sights not turned to words.) 
Horrific. Grisly.   
“Rumplestiltskin!” 
Not my expression. 
Not my net of veins   
beneath thin skin. 
(A morbid dread of throbbing.)   
Of its own accord

A girl is running. Don’t tell me   
“She’s running for her bus.” 
All that aside! 

One morning 
they dig up the sidewalk and leave.
No sign of the truck,
only the large,
dark shadow digging and digging,
piling up sludge with a hand shovel
beside the only tree.
Two o’clock I come by
and he’s slumbering in the grass beside rat holes.
Three and he’s stretched across a jagged stonewall,
folded hands tucked beneath one ear—
a beautiful young boy smiling,
not the heavy, large shadow who can’t breathe.
Four-thirty and the August heat
takes one down here.
He’s pulled up an elbow joint
some three feet round.
At seven I head home for the night,
pass the fresh gravel mound,
a soft footprint near the manhole
like the “x” abuelo would place beside his name
all the years he couldn’t write.

Do not make things too easy. 
There are rocks and abysses in the mind 
As well as meadows. 
There are things knotty and hard: intractable. 
Do not talk to me of love and understanding. 
I am sick of blandishments. 
I want the rock to be met by a rock. 
If I am vile, and behave hideously, 
Do not tell me it was just a misunderstanding.

It's been two thousand years now that, with a wounded leg, 
the god's amazing loves have dragged along. 
He has aged. Soon 
he won't be noticed except from way up in a plane 
in the markings of wheat 
that yield the trace 
of an ancient sanctuary. 
He solicits a language of caresses, 
open pasture, available bodies, 
and the words refuse, and this elsewhere is already in his death 
except for a slender purple flower under the sun. 
He can still act the god all around, 
evening's worn heart. 
He guesses the flower will slip 
fragile 
from one century to the next with its prayer.

Fragile like a child is fragile. 
Destined not to be forever. 
Destined to become other 
To mother. Here I am 
Sitting on a chair, thinking 
About you. Thinking 
About how it was 
To talk to you. 
How sometimes it was wonderful 
And sometimes it was awful. 
How drugs when drugs were 
Undid the good almost entirely 
But not entirely 
Because good could always be seen 
Glimmering like lame glimmers 
In the window of a shop 
Called Beautiful 
Things Never Last Forever. 
I loved you. I love you. You were. 
And you are. Life is experience. 
It's all so simple. Experience is 
The chair we sit on. 
The sitting. The thinking 
Of you where you are a blank 
To be filled 
In by missing. I loved you. 
I love you like I love 
All beautiful things. 
True beauty is truly seldom. 
You were. You are 
In May. May now is looking onto 
The June that is coming up. 
This is how I measure 
The year. Everything Was My Fault 
Has been the theme of the song 
I've been singing, 
Even when you've told me to quiet. 
I haven't been quiet. 
I've been crying. I think you 
Have forgiven me. You keep 
Putting your hand on my shoulder 
When I'm crying. 
Thank you for that. And 
For the ineffable sense 
Of continuance. You were. You are 
The brightest thing in the shop window 
And the most beautiful seldom I ever saw.

A pack of  young flirts was patrolling the party, 
They were cultural outsiders, consumed with    ...    what? 
Their own notion of  beauty as reflected in the shine-more mirror 
Of  a man's pants? Or nothing 
But midnight and no one is counting. 
They were practitioners, they admitted to the barman, 
Of  psychological materialism, explaining they had read both 
Sartre and Beauvoir and believed in the cerebellum, 
The thalamus and the lower brain and that between 
The lower and the upper parts there must be room for them, 
Nant [ nothingness ] aside. 
Indeed, the evening was a spectacular bacchanalia, 
The girls lugging their blind-drunk partners around the floor. 
One sitting it out with a volume of  The Collected Camus. 
That one was “imperious” (the word is Beauvoir's) 
“The club was plunged into almost total darkness, 
With violinists wandering about 
‘Playing soulful Russian music' into the guests' ears.” 
“‘If only it were possible to tell the truth,' 
Exclaimed Camus at one point.” 
There was vodka and champagne, both in quantities 
Extremely beautiful and nice for getting tight. And dancing 
Cheek to cheek, between the exchange of  furtive kisses 
And giggles every time one of  the chaps said, “Don't 
Leave me, I love you, I'll always love you.” 
Which they took as irrefutable evidence 
Of a general greed for human warmth, 
I.e., for touch, even among the agonized 
Post-adolescent dreamers who morphed on the dance floor 
That night into naughty boys, echoing the girls' questions 
Of   “how shall we live,” “what shall we do,” 
Words without end, without weight.

The seas has made a wall for its defence 
of falling water. Those whose impertinence 
leads them to its moving ledges 
it rejects. Those who surrender 
it will with the next wave drag under. 
Sand is the beginning and the end 
of our dominion. 
The way to the dunes is easy. 
The shelving sand is stiffened in the rain 
and loosened again in the sun’s fingers. 
Children, lustful of the glistening hours 
drink and are insatiate. Wind under the eyelids, 
confusion walling their ears, their bodies glow 
in the cold wash of the beach. 
And after, 
they walk with rigid feet the planked street of the town. 
They miss the slipping texture of the sand 
and a sand pillow under the hollow instep. 
They are unmoved by fears 
that breed in darkening kitchens at sundown 
following storm, and they rebel 
against cold waiting in the wind and rain 
for the late sail. 
Did you, as I, 
condemn the coastal fog and long for islands 
seen from a sail’s shadow? 
The dunes lie 
more passive to the wind than water is. 
This, then, the country of our choice. 
It is infertile, narrow, prone 
under a dome of choral sound: 
water breaking upon water. 
Litter of bare logs in the drift— 
the sea has had its sharp word with them. 
Wild roses, wild strawberries cover the dune shoulder 
It is a naked restless garden that descends 
from the crouched pine 
to shellfish caught in flat reflecting sands. 
We lose the childish avarice of horizons. The sea ends 
against another shore. The cracked ribs of a wreck 
project from the washed beach. 
Under the shell-encrusted timbers 
dripping brine 
plucks at the silence of slant chambers 
opening seaward. What moving keel remembers 
such things as here are buried under sand? 
The transitory ponds and smooth bar slide 
easily under the advancing tide, 
emerging with the moon’s 
turning. 
Clear lagoons 
behind the shattered hulk, thin 
movements of sea grass on the dune rim 
bending against cloud, these things are oursI 
Submissive to the sea and wind, 
resistful of all else, sand 
is the beginning and the end 
of our dominion. 

When I know you are coming home
I put on this necklace:
glass beads on a silken thread,
a blue that used to match my eyes.
I like to think I am remembering you.
I like to think you don’t forget.
The necklace lies heavy on my skin,
it clatters when I reach down
to lift my screaming child.
I swing her, roll her in my arms until she forgets.
The beads glitter in the flicker of a TV set
as I sit her on my lap
and wish away the afternoon.
I wait until I hear a gate latch lift
the turn of key in lock.
I sit amongst toys and unwashed clothes,
I sit and she fingers the beads until you speak
in a voice that no longer seems familiar, only strange.
I turn as our child tugs at the string.
I hear a snap and a sound like falling rain.

We are walking our very public attraction 
through eighteenth-century Philadelphia. 
I am simultaneously butch girlfriend 
and suburban child on a school trip, 
Independence Hall, 1775, home 
to the Second Continental Congress. 
Although she is wearing her leather jacket, 
although we have made love for the first time 
in a hotel room on Rittenhouse Square, 
I am preparing my teenage escape from Philadelphia, 
from Elfreth’s Alley, the oldest continuously occupied 
residential street in the nation, 
from Carpenters’ Hall, from Congress Hall, 
from Graff House where the young Thomas 
Jefferson lived, summer of 1776. In my starched shirt 
and waistcoat, in my leggings and buckled shoes, 
in postmodern drag, as a young eighteenth-century statesman, 
I am seventeen and tired of fighting for freedom 
and the rights of men. I am already dreaming of Boston— 
city of women, demonstrations, and revolution 
on a grand and personal scale. 
Then the maître d’ 
is pulling out our chairs for brunch, we have the 
surprised look of people who have been kissing 
and now find themselves dressed and dining 
in a Locust Street townhouse turned café, 
who do not know one another very well, who continue 
with optimism to pursue relationship. Eternity
may simply be our mortal default mechanism 
set on hope despite all evidence. In this mood, 
I roll up my shirtsleeves and she touches my elbow. 
I refuse the seedy view from the hotel window. 
I picture instead their silver inkstands, 
the hoopskirt factory on Arch Street, 
the Wireworks, their eighteenth-century herb gardens, 
their nineteenth-century row houses restored 
with period door knockers. 
Step outside. 
We have been deeded the largest landscaped space 
within a city anywhere in the world. In Fairmount Park, 
on horseback, among the ancient ginkgoes, oaks, persimmons, 
and magnolias, we are seventeen and imperishable, cutting classes 
May of our senior year. And I am happy as the young 
Tom Jefferson, unbuttoning my collar, imagining his power, 
considering my healthy body, how I might use it in the service 
of the country of my pleasure.

No need to be coy—
you know what 
she’s doing
 And so did Bernini,
when he found Teresa 
in the full-throttle of
her divine vision,
caught her at it, 
 carving this surrender
so fluidly you expect
the impossible:
for her tang to swell up, ripe
as seafoam, from the gulf
of her flushed and falling
figure. Perhaps this is how
God comes to us, 
or should come to us, all:
the bluntly and 
beautifully corporeal at
prayers in the Sunday
school of pleasure. Why
shouldn’t He come to us
as He did to Teresa? A saint
on her back—
a girl tearing open 
the gift He gave her?

I’m watching football, which is odd as
I hate football
in a hyperbolic and clinically revealing way,
but I hate Bill Parcells more,
because he is the illuminated manuscript
of cruel, successful men, those with the slitty eyes of ancient reptiles,
who wear their smugness like a tight white turtleneck,
and revel in their lack of empathy
for any living thing.
So I’m watching football, staying up late to watch football,
hoping to witness (as I think of it)
The Humiliation of the Tuna
(as he is called),
which is rightly Parcells’s first time back in the Meadowlands
since taking up with the Cowboys,
who are, as we all know,
thugs, even by the NFL’s standards. The reasons
I hate football are clear and complicated and were born,
as I was, in Nebraska,
where football is to life what sleep deprivation is
to Amnesty International, that is,
the best researched and most effective method
of breaking a soul. Yes,
there’s the glorification of violence, the weird nexus
knitting the homo, both phobic and erotic,
but also, and worse, my parents in 1971, drunk as
Australian parrots in a bottlebush, screeching
WE’RE #1, WE’RE #1!
when the Huskers finally clinched the Orange Bowl,
the two of them
bouncing up and down crazily on the couch, their index
fingers jutting holes through the ubiquitous trail of smoke rings
that was the weather in our house,
until the whole deranged mess that was them,
my parents, the couch, their lit cigarettes,
flipped over backward onto my brother and me. My husband
thinks that’s a funny story and, in an effort to be a “good sport,”
I say I think it is, too.
Which leads me to recall the three Chihuahuas
who’ve spent the fullness of their agitated lives penned
in the back of my neighbor’s yard.
Today they barked continuously for 12 minutes (I timed it) as
the UPS guy made his daily round.
They bark so piercingly, they tremble with such exquisite outrage,
that I’ve begun to root for them, though it’s fashionable
to hate them and increasingly dark threats
against their tiny persons move between the houses on our block.
But isn’t that what’s wrong with this version of America:
the jittering, small-skulled, inbred-by-no-choice-
of-their-own are despised? And Bill Parcells—
the truth is he’ll win
this game. I know it and you know it and, sadly,
did it ever seem there was another possible outcome?
It’s a small deposit,
but I’m putting my faith in reincarnation. I need to believe
in the sweetness of one righteous image,
in Bill Parcells trapped in the body of a teacup poodle,
as any despised thing,
forced to yap away his next life staked to
a clothesline pole or doing hard time on a rich old matron’s lap,
dyed lilac to match her outfit.
I want to live there someday, across that street,
and listen to him. Yap, yap, yap.


And Coyote struts down East 14th
feeling good
looking good
feeling the brown
melting into the brown that loiters
rapping with the brown in front of the Native American Health Center
talking that talk 
of relocation from tribal nation
of recent immigration to the place some call the United States
home to many dislocated funky brown
ironic immigration
more accurate tribal nation to tribal nation
and Coyote sprinkles corn pollen in the four directions
to thank the tribal people
indigenous to what some call the state of California
the city of Oakland
for allowing use of their land.
And Coyote travels by Greyhound from Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA thru
Dinétah
to Oakland, California, USA
laughing
Interstate 40 is cluttered with RVs from as far away as Maine
traveling and traveling
to perpetuate the myth
Coyote kicks back for most of the ride
amused by the constant herd of tourists
amazed by the mythic Indian they create
at a pit stop in Winslow
Coyote trades a worn beaded cigarette lighter for roasted corn
from a middle-aged Navajo woman squatting
in front of a store
and Coyote squats alongside the woman
talking that talk 
of bordertown blues
of reservation discrimination
blues-ing on the brown vibe
a bilagáana snaps a photo
the Navajo woman stands
holding out her hand
requesting some of her soul back
instead
she replaces her soul with a worn picture of George Washington on a dollar bill
and Coyote starts on another ear of corn
climbing onto the Greyhound
the woman
still squatting
waiting 
tired of learning not to want
waits there for the return of all her pieces.
And Coyote wanders
right into a Ponca sitting at the Fruitvale Bart station
next to the Ponca is a Seminole
Coyote struts up to the two
“Where ya’all from?”
the Ponca replies
“Oooklahooma”
pause
the Seminole silent watches a rush of people climb in and out of the train
headed for Fremont
the Seminole stretches his arms up and back stiff from the wooden benches
pause
he pushes his lips out toward the Ponca slowly gesturing that he too is from Oklahoma
Coyote wanders
“where ’bouts?”
the Ponca replies
“Ponnca City”
pause
the Seminole replies
“Seminoole”
Coyote gestures to the Ponca
“You Ponca?”
the Ponca nods his head in affirmation
Coyote nods his head in content
to the Seminole
Coyote asks
“You Seminole?”
pause
the Seminole now watching some kids eating frozen fruit bars
nods his head
and Coyote shares his smokes with the two
and ten minutes later
they travel together on the Richmond train
headed for Wednesday night dinner at the Intertribal Friendship House.
And Coyote blues-ing on the urban brown funk vibe
wanders
in and out of existence 
tasting the brown
rusty at times
worn bitter from relocation.


We brought Hannah home today
in afternoon sun with a crisp chill in the air
on a hill overlooking the bay.
Two women with a child and a shovel and a frozen placenta wrapped in aluminum foil placed in a red plastic bag.
Hannah was brought into this world
some say fourth others say fifth
five days before.
Before we brought her home.
The weekend of rain softened the earth
but the cold discouraged the shovel from denting more than the surface.
I dug into the earth.
The ground weakened beneath the strength I put into the shovel
pounding the ground
smooth and moist at first
then cold and solid.
Pounding the ground
warmed my arms.
I thought good thoughts for Hannah and her mother
and prayed for us all.
Remembering those who have passed on and those to be born
and I thought of my children to be born
and I thought of my father who has passed on.
Breaking into the cold ground
I thought of the day we brought my father home.
Dinétah winter had frozen the ground
and the earth chipped like ice, slivers of crunchy cold beneath our feet.
Our bodies warmed by our work
and the earth chipped like an old tree being chopped, taking hours to finish.
Our bodies tired from our work
and the earth piled high beside the hole like the clouds and just as fluffy.
Our bodies natural returning to the ground. 
I dug into the ground
digging out earth that would nourish Hannah
digging out life that would embody Hannah
and soon a small hole appeared four feet deep.
There we stood
two women with a child and a shovel and a frozen placenta wrapped in aluminum foil placed in a red plastic bag.
The frozen mass of
tissue and blood and life
was placed in the small hole
by Hannah’s mother
and I felt her heat
tissue and blood and life
squatting with bloodied hands and cold earth
bringing Hannah home.


The great labour of appearance
Served the making of the pyre. 
But how 
Nor how
How also
How they
Shal nat be toold
Shall not be told.
Nor how the gods
Nor how the beestes and the birds 
Nor how the ground agast
Nor how the fire 
First with straw
And then with drye 
And then with grene 
And then with gold
And then
Now how a site is laid like this.
Nor what
Nor how
Nor how
Nor what she spak nor what was her desir
Nor what jewels
When the fire
Nor how some threw their 
And some their 
And their 
And cups full of wine and milk 
And blood
Into the fyr
Into the fire.
Nor how three times 
And three times with
And three times how.
And how that
Nor how
Nor how
Nor how
Nor who
I cannot tell 
Nor can I say
But shortly to the point I turn
And make of my tale an ende.


The reservoir is trying to freeze over
with an expanding map shaped like an angel
Separated lovers on a coast keep walking
toward each other. Low sun reddens 
their faces without heat
They are weary of always moving
so seldom touching, but never think
to move inland, massive and stable
Imagoes hatched on thin ice, it’s 
their illusion membranes are brighter
than occluded flesh of interiors
Membranes have the density
of an edge, and edges violent as lava
All day she walked across the tundra
He began to drive away obliquely
at exactly her speed, so she altered 
her angle, aiming above him, as in a current
He departed in a zone that solidified 
at his whim, so she reached for his hand
Land cracked with their weight. He seemed
to reach toward her, a hand like paper
twisted and folded over, only a surface
with wan modulations, like a map
Then she delicately stepped out
toward the edge, tenuous as a leaf
as if waiting for a letter
but it froze too swiftly before her
At dusk his voice broke her concentration
She turned, vexed, and saw he had not spoken.


As usual, the first gate was modest. It is dilapidated. She can’t tell
which bridge crossed the moat, which all cross sand now, disordered with footsteps.
It’s a precise overlay of circles on squares, but she has trouble locating
the main avenue and retraces her steps in intense heat for the correct entrance,
which was intentionally blurred, the  way a round arch can give onto a red wall,
far enough in back of the arch for sun to light.
If being by yourself separates from your symmetry, which is
the axis of your spine in the concrete sense, but becomes a suspension
in your spine like a layer of sand under the paving stones of a courtyard
or on a plain, you have to humbly seek out a person who can listen to you,
on a street crowded with bicycles at night, their bells ringing.
And any stick or straight line you hold can be your spine,
like a map she is following in French of Tan Tien. She wants space to fall
to each side of her like traction, not weight dispersed within a mirror. At any time,
an echo of what she says will multiply against the walls in balanced,
dizzying jumps like a gyroscope in the heat, but she is alone. 
Later, she would remember herself as a carved figure and its shadow on a blank board,
but she is her balancing stick, and the ground to each side of her is its length,
disordered once by an armored car, and once by an urn of flowers at a crossing.
The stick isn’t really the temple’s bisection around her, like solstice or ancestor.
This Tang Dynasty peach tree would be parallel levitation in the spine 
the person recording it.
Slowly the hall looms up. The red stair’s outline gives way to its duration
as it extends and rises at a low angle.
In comparison to the family, the individual hardly counts, but they all
wait for her at a teahouse inside the wall.
First the gold knob, then blue tiers above the highest step,
the same color as the sky. 
When one person came to gain confidence,
she imagines he felt symmetry as flight after his fast among seven meteorites
in the dark. He really felt like a globe revolving within a globe.
Even the most singular or indivisible particle or heavenly sphere will adjust
when the axis extending beyond itself is pushed, or the sphere it is within
is pushed. What she thought was her balance flattens into a stylized dragon
on the marble paving stones. 
Yet she’s reluctant to leave the compound. Only the emperor
could walk its center line. Now, anyone can imagine how it felt
to bring heaven news. She is trying to remember this in Hong Kong
as the tram pulls suddenly above skyscrapers and the harbor
and she flattens against her seat, like a reversal occurring in the poles,
or what she meant by, no one can imagine how. 


They listen to the myna birds dicker in the grass.
   The child’s blue shoes are caked with
garden dirt. When he runs, she sees the antics
   of a pair of wrens. She works the garden,
a pot of rusting gardenias has given off its ales
   and infused the danker germinations of her
grief. She watches her son chase pigeons,
   kick at the leaves piled high. Now, a magpie
adds to his cascades of laughter as he runs with
   the hose, pours a fine spray, happy to be giving
to the grass this silver courtship. She sighs,
   watches the drops settle in. Today, who
can explain the sadness she feels. Surely this
   day is to be treasured: the sun out, the breeze
like a cat’s tongue licking a moon of milk;
   her son expending himself in small, public
bursts, happy among clover where bees hover,
   and unfold centrefolds of nectar. Today,
who can explain the heaviness in her head, as if
   all her worries were tomes toward a larger work,
one she knows she will never finish, but to which
   she must keep adding, thought by thought.
She sweeps the petals, smells their russet imprint.
   Soon dusk will come with an envoy of smoke
and her son outlast her patience by a rose.
   Already he is tiring, puling at the flowers.
It won’t be long before they’ll go in, listen
   to the jug purr comfort. He’ll sleep and she’ll
lie back, or get up to unhook the cry of her cat
   from the wire door. Now, a few cicadas are idling,
giving each other the gun and a cockatoo calls,
   a haughty felon. She sighs, knowing she won’t
escape her mood today, the turned earth
   or its rank persuasions; her child’s petulance
flaring like an orchid, or a cockatoo’s unruly crest.
   Today, she knows she will need to consider
her unhappiness, of what she is a prisoner – if not
   the loss of hope’s particulars. Her son soaks
the path, rinses the sky of its featureless blue.
   He is giving that water, now, to everything.


Today I watched a boy fly his kite.
It didn’t crackle in the wind – but
gave out a barely perceptible hum.
At a certain height, I’d swear I heard
it sing. He could make it climb in
any wind; could crank those angles up,
make it veer with the precision of
an insect targeting a sting; then he’d
let it roil in rapturous finesse, a tiny
bird in mid-air courtship. When
lightning cracked across the cliff –
(like quick pale flicks of yak-hair
fly-whisks) – he stayed steady. For
so long he kept his arms up, as if
he knew he’d hoist that kite enough.
I asked if it was made of special silk,
if he used some particular string –
and what he’d heard while holding it.
He looked at me from a distance,
then asked about my alms bowl,
my robes, and about that for which
a monk lives. It was then I saw
I could tell him nothing in the cohort
wind, that didn’t sound illusory.


Then the day passed into the evening, 
a sovereign, darkening blue. And 
the twenty-six lost miners, 
if living at all, knew nothing of the hour: 
not the languid canter 
of light, or the wind 
curled through the hedgerows. Not pain. 
Not rage. If living at all then 
just this: a worm of black water 
at the lower back. At the lungs 
two tablets of air. 
What is it like there? the broadcaster asked, 
his voice and the slow reply 
cast down through the time zones of America. 
A stillness. All of the families 
asleep in the fire station. 
And the mineworks pale on the landscape. 
What else? 
Nothing. Blue lights of police cars. 
What else? 
Nothing. 
Nothing? 
...The thrum of the crickets. 
A thousand files on a thousand scrapers. 
A thousand taut membranes called mirrors
amplifying the breed-song. A landscape of cupped wings 
amplifying the breed-song. A thousand bodies 
summoned to a thousand bodiesand the song itself a body, 
so in tune with the dusk's warmth 
it slows when a cloud passes over. 
Today. Tomorrow. In that May Nova Scotia darkness 
when the earth flared and collapsed. 
Before that May. After that darkness. 
On the larch bud. On the fire station. 
On shale and the grind-steps of magma. 
On the gold straining in its seam bed. 
On the coal straining. On the twenty-six headlamps 
swaying through the drift tunnels. On the bud. 
On the leaves, on the meadow grass, 
on the wickerwork of shrubs: 
dark cape of desire. 


When the cow died by the green sapling, 
her limp udder splayed on the grass 
like something from the sea, we offered 
our words in their low calibrations— 
which was our fashion—then severed 
her horns with a pug-toothed blade 
and pounded them out to an amber 
transparency, two sheets that became, 
in their moth-wing haze, our parlor windows. 
They softened our guests with the gauze-light 
of the Scriptures, and rendered to us, 
on our merriest days, the sensation 
of gazing through the feet of a gander. 
In time we moved up to the status 
of glass—one pane, then two—each 
cupping in proof of its purity 
a dimple of fault, a form of distortion 
enhancing our image. We took the panes 
with us from cottage to cottage, 
moth-horn and glass, and wedged up 
the misfitted gaps with a poultice 
of gunny and wax. When woodsmoke 
darkened our bricks, we gave 
to the windowsills a lacquer 
of color—clear blue with a lattice 
of yellow: a primary entrance and exit 
for light. And often, walking home 
from the river and small cheese shop, 
we would squint their colors to a sapling 
green, and remember the hull 
of that early body, the slap of fear 
we suffered there, then the little wash 
of recovery that is our fashion—how 
we stroked to her bones a cadenced droning, 
and took back from her absence, our 
amber, half-literal method of sight. 


Day and night, the lake dreams of sky. 
A privacy as old as the mountains 
And her up there, stuck among peaks. The whole eye 
Fastened on hawk, gatherings of cloud or stars, 
So little trespass. An airplane once 
Crossed her brow; she searched but could not find 
A face. Having lived with such strict beauty 
She comes to know how the sun is nothing 
But itself and the path it throws; the moon 
A riddled stone. If only a hand 
Would tremble along her cheek, would disturb. Even the elk 
Pass by, drawn to the spill of creeks below— 
How she cannot help abundance, even as it leaves 
Her, as it sings all the way down the mountain.


the tips of each pine
the spikes of telephone poles
hold gathering crows
may’s errant mustard
spreads wild across paved road
look both ways
roadside treble cleft
feeding gopher, paws to mouth
cheeks puffed with music
yesterday’s spring wind
ruffling the grey tips of fur
rabbit dandelion
turkey vulture feeds
mechanical as a red oil rig
head rocks down up down
stiff-legged dog rises
goes grumbling after squirrel
old ears still flap
snowy egret—curves,
lines, sculpted against pond blue;
white clouds against sky
banded headed bird
this ballerina killdeer
dance on point my heart
leaf wind cold through coat
wails over hills, through barren trees
empty garbage cans dance
damp September night
lone farmer, lighted tractor
drive memory’s worn path
sky black with migration 
flocks settle on barren trees
leaf birds, travel songs
october moon cast
over corn, lighted fields
crinkled sheaves of white
ground painted in frost 
thirsty morning sun drinks white
leaves rust golds return
winter bare branches 
hold tattered cups of summer
empty nests trail twigs
lace edges of ice
manna against darkened sky
words turn with weather
now one to seven
deer or haiku syllables
weave through winter trees
Northern follows jig
body flashes with strike, dive:
broken line floats up.


That old guy with the muskrat soup
slurps it loudly from the ladle
Hoowah, pretty good stuff!
You shift your weight on the stool
raise the bad leg just enough
and retrieve the red bandana hankie.
Talk still spills like sunshine
over the knife-marred counter
as slowly you wipe the can
push the cloth back in your pocket
and cough down the grape pop
glancing at the bobbing black head
where it surfaced in the pot.
The burned farm. That hungry year.
The long walk from Strawberry Mountain
warmed now with the weight
of fresh butchered wiiyaas in your pack.
Mum’s baking soda biscuits mixed and cut
lined waiting in the tin pan
like our little kids’ faces at the window.
Sure took the wrinkle out of our bellies that night.
One opening day when those two old fishermen
ended up drunk clinging to the canoe.
The hunt for diamond willow,
beaver camp on Easter weekend,
the whitefish feeding on wax worms,
the string of crappies slipped from your hand,
the missing outhouse floor,
training waaboose,
feeding the least weasel,
tales from working on the ships,
from boiling sap, planting trees, pounding, carving,
and then the cigar box memories
of those old time Indians
who could really tell stories


There are  at  least two  types of people,  the  first for  whom the  ordinary 
worldliness is easy.  The  regular  social routines  and  material  cares  are 
nothing too external to them and easily absorbed. They are not alien from
the  creation  and  maintenance of the world, and the world does not treat
them  as  alien. And also, from  them, the efforts  toward the world, and to 
them,  the  fulfillment  of the  world's  moderate desires, flow. They are ef-
fortless at eating, moving, arranging their arms as they sit or stand,  being
hired, being paid, cleaning up,  spending, playing, mating.  They are in an
ease and comfort. The world is for the world and for them.
Then there are those over whom the events and opportunities of the every-
day  world wash  over.  There  is  rarely,  in this  second type, any easy kind 
of absorption.  There  is only  a  visible  evidence  of having  been made of a 
different  substance,  one that  repels.  Also, from them,  it is almost impos-
sible  to  give  to  the  world  what  it will  welcome or reward. For how does
this  second  type  hold  their arms?  Across their chest? Behind their back? 
And  how  do  they  find  food  to eat  and  then prepare this food? And how 
do  they  receive  a  check or endorse it? And what also of the difficulties of
love  or  being loved, its  expansiveness,  the way it is used for markets and 
indentured moods?
And what is this  second  substance?  And how does it come  to have as one
of  its  qualities  the  resistance of the world  as it is?  And also,  what is  the 
person  made  of  the  second  substance?   Is this a  human or more or  less 
than one? Where is the true impermeable community of the second human
whose  arms  do  not  easily  arrange  themselves and for whom the salaries 
and  weddings  and  garages do not come?
These are, perhaps, not two sorts of persons, but two kinds of fortune. The
first is soft and regular. The second is a baffled kind, and magnetic only  to 
the second substance, and made itself out of a different, second, substance,
and having, at its end, a second, and almost blank-faced, reward.


When I am not writing I am not writing a novel called 1994  about a young 
woman  in  an  office park  in a  provincial town who has a job  cutting  and
pasting time. I am not writing a novel called Nero about the world's richest 
art star in space.  I am not writing  a book  called Kansas City Spleen.  I am 
not writing a sequel to Kansas City Spleen called Bitch's Maldoror. I am not 
writing  a  book of  political  philosophy called Questions for Poets. I am not 
writing a scandalous memoir.  I am not writing a pathetic memoir. I am not 
writing  a  memoir  about  poetry  or  love.  I am not writing a memoir about 
poverty,  debt  collection,  or  bankruptcy.  I   am  not  writing   about family 
court.  I am not writing a memoir because memoirs are for property owners 
and not  writing a memoir about  prohibitions of memoirs.
When  I am not writing a memoir  I am also not writing any kind of  poetry, 
not  prose  poems  contemporary   or  otherwise,  not  poems made  of frag-
ments,  not tightened and  compressed poems, not loosened and  conversa-
tional poems, not conceptual  poems, not virtuosic poems employing many
different  types of  euphonious devices, not poems with epiphanies and not 
poems  without,  not  documentary  poems about recent political moments, 
not  poems  heavy with allusions to critical theory and popular song.
I am not writing "Leaving the Atocha Station" by Anne Boyer and certain-
ly  not  writing  "Nadja"  by  Anne Boyer though would like to write "Debt" 
by  Anne Boyer  though  am  not  writing  also  "The  German Ideology" by 
Anne  Boyer  and not writing a screenplay called "Sparticists."
I am not writing an account of myself more miserable than Rousseau.
I am not writing an account of myself more innocent than Blake.
I am not writing epic poetry although I like what Milton said about lyric
poets drinking wine while epic poets should drink water from a  wooden 
bowl. I would like to drink wine from a wooden  bowl  or to drink  water 
from an emptied bottle of wine.
I am not writing a book about shopping, which is a woman shopping. 
I am not  writing  accounts  of  dreams,  not  my own or anyone else's. 
I am not writing historical re-enactments of any durational literature.
I am not writing anything that anyone  has requested of me or is  waiting 
on,  not  a  poetics  essay  or any other sort of essay, not a  roundtable re-
sponse, not interview responses, not writing prompts for younger writers, 
not my thoughts about critical theory or popular songs.
I am not writing a new constitution for the republic of no history.
I am not writing a will or a medical report.
I am  not  writing  Facebook status updates. I am not writing thank-you 
notes or apologies. I am not writing conference papers. I am not writing 
book reviews. I am not writing blurbs.
I  am not writing  about contemporary  art. I am  not writing  accounts of 
my travels.  I am  not writing  reviews for  The New Inquiry and not writ-
ing pieces for Triple Canopy and not writing anything for Fence. I am not 
writing a  daily  accounting  of my reading, activities, and ideas.   I am not 
writing  science  fiction  novels  about  the  problem  of  the idea of the au-
tonomy  of  art  and  science  fiction  novels about the problem of a society 
with  only  one  law  which  is  consent.  I am  not  writing stories based on
Nathaniel Hawthorne's unwritten story ideas. I am not writing online dat-
ing profiles.  I am not writing anonymous communiqués.  I am not writing 
textbooks.
I am not writing a history of these times or of past times or of any future
times and not even the history of these visions which are with me all day 
and all of the night.


En Cuba tuve—
I’m tired of hearing your complaints.
All that whining about elexilio, the tragedy of loss,
In Cuba I had—
the catalogue of things, the status, the riches,
the opulence of it all.
I had a mate. We were a pair. Our mistress was young. We
were young. We would dangle on her ear
Concentrate on what you have.
Forget the past.
and go out on the town. Mojitos at La Floridita,
dancing at the Tropicana and later
No, don’t tell me about later.
in the jewel case, an aqua Tiffany box
with white satin interior, we
Tiffany’s? From New York? I didn’t know you—
would lie together in the pillowy luxury,
my ruby top layer and his aligned, our bases
Please you needn’t—
touching, my diamond waist and his forming a continuous
line. Sometimes we would switch backs, I’d push
I understand that in communities of exile
the population
my piercing needle through his back, his
through mine. That’s
tends to lose ground politically as
assimilation takes place, that
how I liked it best, a little harsh, but sweet.
Tu y yo, you and I, is what she called us because our very
longing is a constitutive ingredient
of not only the condition of exile but—
body parts were paired, he and I, forming a single unit, an I and a
thou. Apart
Surely you have adjusted. Look, you’re mounted on a ring, you
are independent, and prized. Very attractive for your age, I might add.
we are nothing. Longing doesn’t quite—
One adapts?
As to an amputation.
And La Revolución?
Don’t make me vomit.


It was a beach
like all beaches, only perhaps more beautiful.
And the sand was pink not red.
We would arrive in caravans,
hampers overflowing with food and drink
like Aziz and his party on the way to Malabar.
The colonials and their servants away on an outing.
We would stop under thatch umbrellas,
towels and tablecloths spread out against the sea.
My mother in her skirted swim suit
surrounded by fathers of other children,
her olive skin lit through her straw hat.
They would laugh and drink beer
and leer
while the children did the usual beach things,
boring futile tunnels to China, running
at waves and then away,
daring each other to be swallowed.
I would go out by the forbidden rocks and pick off oysters,
then give them to the men to pry open,
cover with lime juice and suck dry.
Once, I saw my mother sucking
an oyster out of another daddy’s hand.
Her dappled face bobbed and smiled and her tongue
searched the shell for pearls.


When it’s that time of month
it’s like falling backwards in “time.”
God has abandoned her glass carriage,
she is “dead.”
And the edges of objects: wavy
in the eye that’s about to cry,
a twitter running down the spine of…
Oh God, it can’t be. (Insert song of mourning.)
God and time, spine of the world — yawn, blah, blah, schma…
what I meant to say is
it’s hard to be a capitalist.
If the world’s time is God, and she’s birds
atwitter, then why must I go to work?
The answer writes itself:
left to my own devices I’d just sink into the soil.
That is, write, with dirt
as my pillow.   In the hole between twitters
there’s random patches
of mud-sky. So humid.
There’re chairs growing in hell.
There’re chairs growing in hell,
and people sit on them, my co-workers:
it’s like riding on toadstools
except you don’t know it, or
you kind of know it that time of
month.
That’s when you feel the twitter, the muddy shiver.
You dream of your uncle turning a lamb on a spit
high on a green cliff, with fog thickening around him
and then he’s made to swallow keys and little hammers—
you claw the red clay.
Now wake.
Show me the bouquet!
No, don’t show me the bouquet.
Show me the bouquet!
If you do, I won’t tell on you
to the rose of the world. She can make him hear you up there.
Besides, it’s not a cliff, it’s a chair.
And the rose is God.
Got it?
Gott it?
This is why women should be President.


Amy, Amy, at this distance you’re
the smell of liver,
tinnitus that keeps me up, afraid:
your fortressness must now be tested.
The way you took me in without
a surfeit click or
gesture: seagull kerchief
binding my gut to safety
on the swimming haul
among night-images.       I went to the place I was born
and it plainly was a bride. So I ran after her.
When she turned into a star I swallowed her.
And out of this uneasiness will come
an aster.
Amy, I’m inside my granddad’s mind of wood:
the grass is finer, constellations thicker.
The plums are normal. How
much sugar did you buy
alone at Waldbaums?
Brook reeds here
wake from your hair’s soul’s chilly patronage.
The hair’s the soul, the reeds
its body—alone in their beds
like schoolgirls:
I feel and feel them up.
The cigarettes
have made them crazy! But a rabbit someone 
flows out of the embankment
and I shiver for you, Amy
oh lengthy dappled wig:
there’s a swan in your breathing.
There always is.


I was lying loose from God. Strange is it not best   
Beloved, in the New World, in this skinny life, 
Intemperate with chance, my spirit quickens   
For the fall’s estate. In India, the half 
Hour is the hour, we were like that then— 
Jammed wrong & wrong in the diurnal 
Mangy chambers of our carnall 
Hearts, the rose robes rustling loose as velvet 
Curtains at the stage prow, passing   
Into the strange salt air of an Indian 
Ocean, hoarding kindling, heading   
West with hours, later than we might 
Have known, counting tins of meats & oil left,   
If they should lose or last the night.


Wanting is reposed and plump   
As the hands of a Romanov child 

Folded in the doeskin sashes of her lap,   
Paused before the little war begins. 

            This one will be guttural, this war.   
How is it possible to still be startled 

As I am by the oblong silhouette of the coiling   
Index finger of a pending death. 

No longer will 
                        Wooing be the wondrous 

Thing; instead, a homely domesticity, constant   
As a field of early rye and yarrow-light. 

What one is fit to stand is not what one is   
Given, necessarily, and not this night.


(from her to ravish meaning ravine On the other side 
artifice slumbers in the green. The shadow follows hour 
by hour hollow and gloomy and which call me forth)
grafted onto the sentence 
o a long time distant to hang on my belly obscure parallel 
images and tattoos age suggestive of the fingernail grazing 
the thigh the valley get turned on
an urban image from the eighties
when we hung out at Chez Madam Arthur
and at the back of the room
women wrapped their arms around
nights of ink and dawn
calendar of murmurs
vague caresses about the planet and its water
we could have confused words
but there were doors open
confetti in the midst of darkness
gentle ways
to swoon in a corner with she who
put her tongue in my mouth
focus on yes, on the woman’s
eyelids
caress not silence not word
focus beyond. Hold me back


I approached the luminous stranger who came to me 
from darkness in a gown of lettuce leaves, in a velvet 

cloak of green that appeared at first another piece of dark, 
but pulled apart into the glow-sphere that danced 

in swaying steps, the lucent majesty that slipped toward me 
from the reigning silence black above my cage. 

Oh extravagant—and were my teeth too sharp to greet 
or sharp enough? I do not understand now what was meant 

to happen and what was a mistake—but know the bursting, 
the sickening snap of ecstasy wrenched back to the body 

and the green gown flung in crippled circles traced 
like diagrams of wasting moons above my head—or portals 

to another world, I thought, but as I thought, the shriek 
dissolved, the body crumpled from the air and landed 

on its side beneath the salt lick. All night I tended 
the wasted skin and careful, brought it water, 

alfalfa, made a bed of cedar chips and tried to gather 
molecules of breath that floated from the plant shelf. 

When I remembered morning, I began to cry, began to pray 
for night to stay until the green took shape again 

and if that shape were gone, I prayed for night 
to stay, to be held in the same forever-dark


in which I first looked up and saw the gentle body,
and saw the graceful swaying of the stranger coming
 
as if for me—now I do not know—but then,
as if for me, and all my loneliness gone.


After I found out that you were a sheep, 
it was always afternoon, and I stood trembling 
at the pasture fence, my hands full of dandelion 
and the longer grasses. How could I call you 

to come near? We had no names and only 
this place, this sun, the hill and its limitless sky 
held together by your gentle outline as you leaned 
toward tufts of grass. How beautiful you were, 

so still, so close to moving. I gathered 
bouquets of clover, strung violets from the fence slats. 
Sometimes I whispered, but the words disappeared 
before I knew what they were or what they meant.   

Once I saw darkness. I remember my eyes were open 
and there was nothing, only black, and my heart aching 
as I felt for my face and I was still human. While I cried,
stars came and traced sheep in the sky and the voice that knew 

never spoke. I fell asleep mistaking the scent of hay 
for your breath. To wake once from the sleep in which 
you are held, in which your name emanates without utterance 
from the being that cradles you—There is no other sleep. 

Now it is always afternoon. How can I call you 
when we have no names? I search 
for the clover and violets. There are always enough. 
My shadow is always the same length and shaped 

with arms and legs. Between us, the distance of field is green 
and exact; the sun gleams from its cloudless height—I know 
that there is enough time, that there is always enough.   
Please. Come to me, remember me: undo this world.


While clearing the west 
quarter for more cropland, 
the Cat quarried 
a porcelain doorknob 

oystered in earth, 
grained and crazed 
like an historic egg, 
with a screwless stem of 

rusted and pitted iron. 
I turn its cold white roundness 
with my palm and 
open the oak door 

fitted with oval glass, 
fretted with wood ivy, 
and call my frontier neighbor. 
Her voice comes distant but 

clear, scolding children 
in overalls 
and highbutton shoes. 
A bucket of fresh eggs and 

a clutch of rhubarb rest 
on her daisied oil-cloth. 
She knew I would knock someday, 
wanting in.


Two wind chimes, 
one brass and prone to anger, 
one with the throat of an angel, 
swing from my porch eave, 
sing with the storm. 
Last year I lived five months 
under that shrill choir, 
boxing your house, crowding books 
into crates, from some pages 
your own voice crying. 
Some days the chimes raged. 
Some days they hung still. 
They fretted when I dug up 
the lily I gave you in April, 
blooming, strangely, in fall. 
Together, they scolded me 
when I counted pennies you left 
in each can, cup, and drawer, 
when I rechecked the closets 
for remnants of you. 
The last day, the house empty, 
resonant with space, the two chimes 
had nothing to toll for. 
I walked out, took them down, 
carried our mute spirits home.


I was ready for a new experience.
All the old ones had burned out.
 
They lay in little ashy heaps along the roadside
And blew in drifts across the fairgrounds and fields.
 
From a distance some appeared to be smoldering 
But when I approached with my hat in my hands
 
They let out small puffs of smoke and expired.
Through the windows of houses I saw lives lit up
 
With the otherworldly glow of TV
And these were smoking a little bit too.
 
I flew to Rome. I flew to Greece.
I sat on a rock in the shade of the Acropolis
 
And conjured dusky columns in the clouds.
I watched waves lap the crumbling coast.
 
I heard wind strip the woods.
I saw the last living snow leopard
 
Pacing in the dirt. Experience taught me
That nothing worth doing is worth doing
 
For the sake of experience alone.
I bit into an apple that tasted sweetly of time.
 
The sun came out. It was the old sun
With only a few billion years left to shine. 


It's a bug's world of intrigue and mystery,
with humans a blip in their history.
So when insects flitter and scurry past us
Take note, because they may outlast us!


there were so many books. she had to separate them to avoid being overwhelmed by the excessive implications of their words. she kept hundreds in a series of boxes inside a wire cage in a warehouse. and hundreds more on the shelves of her various rooms. when she changed houses she would pack some of the books into the boxes and exchange them for others that had been hibernating. these resurrected books were precious to her for a while. they had assumed the patinas of dusty chthonic wisdoms. and thus she would let them sit on the shelves admiring them from a distance. gathering time and air. she did not want to be intimate with their insides. the atmospherics suggested by the titles were enough. sometimes she would increase the psychic proximities between herself and the books and place a pile of them on the floor next to her bed. and quite possibly she absorbed their intentions while she slept.
 
            if she intended travelling beyond a few hours she would occasionally remove a book from the shelves and place it in her bag. she carried ‘the poetics of space’ round india for three months and it returned to her shelves undamaged at the completion of the journey. every day of those three months she touched it and read some of the titles of its chapters to make sure it was there. and real. chapters called house and universe, nests, shells, intimate immensity, miniatures and, the significance of the hut. she had kept it in a pocket of her bag together with a coloured whistle and an acorn. she now kept this book in the darkness of her reference shelf. and she knew that one day she would have to admit to herself that this was the only book she had need of, that this was the book she would enter the pages of, that this was the book she was going to read


in order to upgrade the community’s appreciation of poetry during the international year of cultural enrichment stage 2, members of the state’s library progress committee decided to establish a small library of t-shirts on which would be printed quality verse in vivid, bold colours and lettering. the poems would be selected on the basis of one of three qualities: is the poem poignant, perspicacious, or pithy.
 
given the respectably researched fact that the wearing of words on t-shirts expresses a deep psychic desire for an intimate union of word and flesh, (and bear in mind the way “logo” nudges towards “logos”) it is not surprising that this library of t-shirts has been a great success. no one seems to mind borrowing pre-worn clothing. of course the library’s washing and ironing staff maintain the t-shirts in excellent condition. even after ten borrowings the shirts look brand new. and considering the phenomenal success of andrew lloyd webber’s “cats” it is no shock revelation that t.s. eliot’s “hollow men” has proved to be the library’s most popular t-shirt so far. in fact there are now eight copies of this shirt on loan, most in metallic or fluoro colours.
 
a couple of the more entrepreneurial of the library’s progress committee members are leading the push for diversification of the library’s poetry program, into neck to knee anti-uv swimwear, with maybe slessor, shelly and stevie smith prints for starters; and into underpants, with their multiple attractions.
 
while the committee feels both these garments could increase poetry’s appeal, they are worried about the practicability of adding these garments to the t-shirt poetry collection. would many members want to borrow preworn underpants, however compelling the poems’ cadences and metaphors; while the wear and tear on the swimming costume fabric via chlorine and salt water would perhaps be too great. however they are interested in marketing and selling these articles from a stall in the library’s foyer. the only committee member unenthusiastic regarding this proposal is an optometrist who has raised the issue of eye damage if the typeface of the lines of verse on the underpants were too small. a solution in the form of large print haikus is being considered.


O now you come in rut,
in rank and black desire,
to beat the brush, to lash
the wind with your long hair.
Ha! I am afraid,
exceedingly afraid.
But see? her path goes there,
along the swaying tops
of trees, up to the hills.
Too long she is alone.
Bypass our fields, and mount
your ravages of fire
and rain on higher trails.
You shall have her lying down
upon the smoking mountains.


Bending, I bow my head
and lay my hands upon
her hair, combing, and think
how women do this for
each other. My daughter’s hair
curls against the comb,
wet and fragrant— orange
parings. Her face, downcast,
is quiet for one so young.

I take her place. Beneath
my mother’s hands I feel
the braids drawn up tight
as piano wires and singing,
vinegar-rinsed. Sitting
before the oven I hear
the orange coils tick
the early hour before school.

She combed her grandmother
Mathilda’s hair using
a comb made out of bone.
Mathilda rocked her oak wood
chair, her face downcast,
intent on tearing rags 
in strips to braid a cotton
rug from bits of orange
and brown. A simple act
Preparing hair. Something
women do for each other,
plaiting the generations.


Isaiah awoke angry. 

Lapping at Isaiah’s ears black birdsong no it was anger.   

God had filled Isaiah’s ears with stingers. 

Once God and Isaiah were friends. 

God and Isaiah used to converse nightly, Isaiah would rush into the garden. 

They conversed under the Branch, night streamed down. 

From the sole of the foot to the head God would make Isaiah ring.   

Isaiah had loved God and now his love was turned to pain.   

Isaiah wanted a name for the pain, he called it sin. 

Now Isaiah was a man who believed he was a nation. 

Isaiah called the nation Judah and the sin Judah’s condition.   

Inside Isaiah God saw the worldsheet burning. 

Isaiah and God saw things differently, I can only tell you their actions. 

Isaiah addressed the nation.   

Man’s brittleness! cried Isaiah. 

The nation stirred in its husk and slept again. 

Two slabs of bloody meat lay folded on its eyes like wings.   

Like a hard glossy painting the nation slept. 

Who can invent a new fear? 

Yet I have invented sin, thought Isaiah, running his hand over the knobs. 

And then, because of a great attraction between them— 

which Isaiah fought (for and against) for the rest of his life— 

God shattered Isaiah’s indifference. 

God washed Isaiah’s hair in fire. 

God took the stay. 

From beneath its meat wings the nation listened.   

You, said Isaiah. 

No answer. 

I cannot hear you, Isaiah spoke again under the Branch.   

Light bleached open the night camera. 

God arrived. 

God smashed Isaiah like glass through every socket of his nation.   

Liar! said God. 

Isaiah put his hands on his coat, he put his hand on his face. 

Isaiah is a small man, said Isaiah, but no liar. 

God paused. 

And so that was their contract.   

Brittle on both sides, no lying. 

Isaiah’s wife came to the doorway, the doorposts had moved.   

What’s that sound? said Isaiah’s wife.   

The fear of the Lord, said Isaiah.   

He grinned in the dark, she went back inside.


I 

I can hear little clicks inside my dream. 
Night drips its silver tap 
down the back. 
At 4 A.M. I wake. Thinking 

of the man who 
left in September. 
His name was Law. 

My face in the bathroom mirror 
has white streaks down it. 
I rinse the face and return to bed. 
Tomorrow I am going to visit my mother. 


SHE 

She lives on a moor in the north. 
She lives alone. 
Spring opens like a blade there. 
I travel all day on trains and bring a lot of books— 

some for my mother, some for me 
including The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë. 
This is my favourite author. 

Also my main fear, which I mean to confront. 
Whenever I visit my mother 
I feel I am turning into Emily Brontë, 

my lonely life around me like a moor, 
my ungainly body stumping over the mud flats with a look of transformation 
that dies when I come in the kitchen door. 
What meat is it, Emily, we need? 



THREE 

Three silent women at the kitchen table. 
My mother’s kitchen is dark and small but out the window 
there is the moor, paralyzed with ice. 
It extends as far as the eye can see 

over flat miles to a solid unlit white sky. 
Mother and I are chewing lettuce carefully. 
The kitchen wall clock emits a ragged low buzz that jumps 

once a minute over the twelve. 
I have Emily p. 216 propped open on the sugarbowl 
but am covertly watching my mother. 

A thousand questions hit my eyes from the inside. 
My mother is studying her lettuce. 
I turn to p. 217. 

“In my flight through the kitchen I knocked over Hareton 
who was hanging a litter of puppies 
from a chairback in the doorway. . . .” 

It is as if we have all been lowered into an atmosphere of glass. 
Now and then a remark trails through the glass. 
Taxes on the back lot. Not a good melon, 

too early for melons. 
Hairdresser in town found God, closes shop every Tuesday. 
Mice in the teatowel drawer again. 
Little pellets. Chew off 

the corners of the napkins, if they knew 
what paper napkins cost nowadays. 
Rain tonight. 

Rain tomorrow. 
That volcano in the Philippines at it again. What’s her name 
Anderson died no not Shirley 

the opera singer. Negress. 
Cancer. 
Not eating your garnish, you don’t like pimento? 

Out the window I can see dead leaves ticking over the flatland 
and dregs of snow scarred by pine filth. 
At the middle of the moor 

where the ground goes down into a depression, 
the ice has begun to unclench. 
Black open water comes 

curdling up like anger. My mother speaks suddenly. 
That psychotherapy’s not doing you much good is it? 
You aren’t getting over him. 

My mother has a way of summing things up. 
She never liked Law much 
but she liked the idea of me having a man and getting on with life. 

Well he’s a taker and you’re a giver I hope it works out, 
was all she said after she met him. 
Give and take were just words to me 

at the time. I had not been in love before. 
It was like a wheel rolling downhill. 
But early this morning while mother slept 

and I was downstairs reading the part in Wuthering Heights
where Heathcliff clings at the lattice in the storm sobbing 
Come in! Come in! to the ghost of his heart’s darling, 

I fell on my knees on the rug and sobbed too. 
She knows how to hang puppies, 
that Emily. 

It isn’t like taking an aspirin you know, I answer feebly. 
Dr. Haw says grief is a long process. 
She frowns. What does it accomplish 

all that raking up the past? 
Oh—I spread my hands— 
I prevail! I look her in the eye. 
She grins. Yes you do. 


WHACHER 

Whacher, 
Emily’s habitual spelling of this word, 
has caused confusion. 
For example 

in the first line of the poem printed Tell me, whether, is it winter? 
in the Shakespeare Head edition. 
But whacher is what she wrote. 

Whacher is what she was. 
She whached God and humans and moor wind and open night. 
She whached eyes, stars, inside, outside, actual weather. 

She whached the bars of time, which broke. 
She whached the poor core of the world, 
wide open. 

To be a whacher is not a choice. 
There is nowhere to get away from it, 
no ledge to climb up to—like a swimmer 

who walks out of the water at sunset 
shaking the drops off, it just flies open. 
To be a whacher is not in itself sad or happy, 

although she uses these words in her verse 
as she uses the emotions of sexual union in her novel, 
grazing with euphemism the work of whaching. 

But it has no name. 
It is transparent. 
Sometimes she calls it Thou. 

“Emily is in the parlour brushing the carpet,” 
records Charlotte in 1828. 
Unsociable even at home 

and unable to meet the eyes of strangers when she ventured out, 
Emily made her awkward way 
across days and years whose bareness appalls her biographers. 

This sad stunted life, says one. 
Uninteresting, unremarkable, wracked by disappointment 
and despair, says another. 

She could have been a great navigator if she’d been male, 
suggests a third. Meanwhile 
Emily continued to brush into the carpet the question, 

Why cast the world away. 
For someone hooked up to Thou, 
the world may have seemed a kind of half-finished sentence. 

But in between the neighbour who recalls her 
coming in from a walk on the moors 
with her face “lit up by a divine light” 

and the sister who tells us 
Emily never made a friend in her life, 
is a space where the little raw soul 

slips through. 
It goes skimming the deep keel like a storm petrel, 
out of sight. 

The little raw soul was caught by no one. 
She didn’t have friends, children, sex, religion, marriage, success, a salary 
or a fear of death. She worked 

in total six months of her life (at a school in Halifax) 
and died on the sofa at home at 2 P.M. on a winter afternoon 
in her thirty-first year. She spent 

most of the hours of her life brushing the carpet, 
walking the moor 
or whaching. She says 

it gave her peace. 
“All tight and right in which condition it is to be hoped we shall all be this    
    day 4 years,” 
she wrote in her Diary Paper of 1837. 

Yet her poetry from beginning to end is concerned with prisons, 
vaults, cages, bars, curbs, bits, bolts, fetters, 
locked windows, narrow frames, aching walls. 

“Why all the fuss?” asks one critic. 
“She wanted liberty. Well didn’t she have it? 
A reasonably satisfactory homelife, 

a most satisfactory dreamlife—why all this beating of wings? 
What was this cage, invisible to us, 
which she felt herself to be confined in?” 

Well there are many ways of being held prisoner, 
I am thinking as I stride over the moor. 
As a rule after lunch mother has a nap 

and I go out to walk. 
The bare blue trees and bleached wooden sky of April 
carve into me with knives of light. 

Something inside it reminds me of childhood— 
it is the light of the stalled time after lunch 
when clocks tick 

and hearts shut 
and fathers leave to go back to work 
and mothers stand at the kitchen sink pondering 

something they never tell. 
You remember too much, 
my mother said to me recently. 

Why hold onto all that? And I said, 
Where can I put it down? 
She shifted to a question about airports. 

Crops of ice are changing to mud all around me 
as I push on across the moor 
warmed by drifts from the pale blue sun. 

On the edge of the moor our pines 
dip and coast in breezes 
from somewhere else. 

Perhaps the hardest thing about losing a lover is 
to watch the year repeat its days. 
It is as if I could dip my hand down 

into time and scoop up 
blue and green lozenges of April heat 
a year ago in another country. 

I can feel that other day running underneath this one 
like an old videotape—here we go fast around the last corner 
up the hill to his house, shadows 

of limes and roses blowing in the car window 
and music spraying from the radio and him 
singing and touching my left hand to his lips. 

Law lived in a high blue room from which he could see the sea. 
Time in its transparent loops as it passes beneath me now 
still carries the sound of the telephone in that room 

and traffic far off and doves under the window 
chuckling coolly and his voice saying, 
You beauty. I can feel that beauty’s 

heart beating inside mine as she presses into his arms in the high blue room— 
No, I say aloud. I force my arms down 
through air which is suddenly cold and heavy as water 

and the videotape jerks to a halt 
like a glass slide under a drop of blood. 
I stop and turn and stand into the wind, 

which now plunges towards me over the moor. 
When Law left I felt so bad I thought I would die. 
This is not uncommon. 

I took up the practice of meditation. 
Each morning I sat on the floor in front of my sofa 
and chanted bits of old Latin prayers. 

De profundis clamavi ad te Domine. 
Each morning a vision came to me. 
Gradually I understood that these were naked glimpses of my soul. 

I called them Nudes. 
Nude #1. Woman alone on a hill. 
She stands into the wind. 

It is a hard wind slanting from the north. 
Long flaps and shreds of flesh rip off the woman’s body and lift 
and blow away on the wind, leaving 

an exposed column of nerve and blood and muscle 
calling mutely through lipless mouth. 
It pains me to record this, 

I am not a melodramatic person. 
But soul is “hewn in a wild workshop” 
as Charlotte Brontë says of Wuthering Heights. 

Charlotte’s preface to Wuthering Heights is a publicist’s masterpiece. 
Like someone carefully not looking at a scorpion 
crouched on the arm of the sofa Charlotte 

talks firmly and calmly 
about the other furniture of Emily’s workshop—about 
the inexorable spirit (“stronger than a man, simpler than a child”), 

the cruel illness (“pain no words can render”), 
the autonomous end (“she sank rapidly, she made haste to leave us”) 
and about Emily’s total subjection 

to a creative project she could neither understand nor control, 
and for which she deserves no more praise nor blame 
than if she had opened her mouth 

“to breathe lightning.” The scorpion is inching down 
the arm of the sofa while Charlotte 
continues to speak helpfully about lightning 

and other weather we may expect to experience 
when we enter Emily’s electrical atmosphere. 
It is “a horror of great darkness” that awaits us there 

but Emily is not responsible. Emily was in the grip. 
“Having formed these beings she did not know what she had done,” 
says Charlotte (of Heathcliff and Earnshaw and Catherine). 

Well there are many ways of being held prisoner. 
The scorpion takes a light spring and lands on our left knee 
as Charlotte concludes, “On herself she had no pity.” 

Pitiless too are the Heights, which Emily called Wuthering 
because of their “bracing ventilation” 
and “a north wind over the edge.” 

Whaching a north wind grind the moor 
that surrounded her father’s house on every side, 
formed of a kind of rock called millstone grit, 

taught Emily all she knew about love and its necessities— 
an angry education that shapes the way her characters 
use one another. “My love for Heathcliff,” says Catherine, 

“resembles the eternal rocks beneath 
a source of little visible delight, but necessary.” 
Necessary? I notice the sun has dimmed 

and the afternoon air sharpening. 
I turn and start to recross the moor towards home. 
What are the imperatives 

that hold people like Catherine and Heathcliff 
together and apart, like pores blown into hot rock 
and then stranded out of reach 

of one another when it hardens? What kind of necessity is that? 
The last time I saw Law was a black night in September. 
Autumn had begun, 

my knees were cold inside my clothes. 
A chill fragment of moon rose. 
He stood in my living room and spoke 

without looking at me. Not enough spin on it, 
he said of our five years of love. 
Inside my chest I felt my heart snap into two pieces 

which floated apart. By now I was so cold 
it was like burning. I put out my hand 
to touch his. He moved back. 

I don’t want to be sexual with you, he said. Everything gets crazy. 
But now he was looking at me. 
Yes, I said as I began to remove my clothes. 

Everything gets crazy. When nude 
I turned my back because he likes the back. 
He moved onto me. 

Everything I know about love and its necessities 
I learned in that one moment 
when I found myself 

thrusting my little burning red backside like a baboon 
at a man who no longer cherished me. 
There was no area of my mind 

not appalled by this action, no part of my body 
that could have done otherwise. 
But to talk of mind and body begs the question. 

Soul is the place, 
stretched like a surface of millstone grit between body and mind, 
where such necessity grinds itself out. 

Soul is what I kept watch on all that night. 
Law stayed with me. 
We lay on top of the covers as if it weren’t really a night of sleep and time, 

caressing and singing to one another in our made-up language 
like the children we used to be. 
That was a night that centred Heaven and Hell, 

as Emily would say. We tried to fuck 
but he remained limp, although happy. I came 
again and again, each time accumulating lucidity, 

until at last I was floating high up near the ceiling looking down 
on the two souls clasped there on the bed 
with their mortal boundaries 

visible around them like lines on a map. 
I saw the lines harden. 
He left in the morning. 

It is very cold 
walking into the long scraped April wind. 
At this time of year there is no sunset 
just some movements inside the light and then a sinking away. 


KITCHEN 

Kitchen is quiet as a bone when I come in. 
No sound from the rest of the house. 
I wait a moment 
then open the fridge. 

Brilliant as a spaceship it exhales cold confusion. 
My mother lives alone and eats little but her fridge is always crammed. 
After extracting the yogurt container 

from beneath a wily arrangement of leftover blocks of Christmas cake 
wrapped in foil and prescription medicine bottles 
I close the fridge door. Bluish dusk 

fills the room like a sea slid back. 
I lean against the sink. 
White foods taste best to me 

and I prefer to eat alone. I don’t know why. 
Once I heard girls singing a May Day song that went: 

                                 Violante in the pantry 
                                 Gnawing at a mutton bone 
                                 How she gnawed it 
                                 How she clawed it 
                                 When she felt herself alone. 

Girls are cruelest to themselves. 
Someone like Emily Brontë, 
who remained a girl all her life despite her body as a woman, 

had cruelty drifted up in all the cracks of her like spring snow. 
We can see her ridding herself of it at various times 
with a gesture like she used to brush the carpet. 

Reason with him and then whip him! 
was her instruction (age six) to her father 
regarding brother Branwell. 

And when she was 14 and bitten by a rabid dog she strode (they say) 
into the kitchen and taking red hot tongs from the back of the stove applied 
them directly to her arm. 

Cauterization of Heathcliff took longer. 
More than thirty years in the time of the novel, 
from the April evening when he runs out the back door of the kitchen 
and vanishes over the moor 

because he overheard half a sentence of Catherine’s 
(“It would degrade me to marry Heathcliff”) 
until the wild morning 

when the servant finds him stark dead and grinning 
on his rainsoaked bed upstairs in Wuthering Heights. 
Heathcliff is a pain devil. 

If he had stayed in the kitchen 
long enough to hear the other half of Catherine’s sentence 
(“so he will never know how I love him”) 

Heathcliff would have been set free. 
But Emily knew how to catch a devil. 
She put into him in place of a soul 

the constant cold departure of Catherine from his nervous system 
every time he drew a breath or moved thought. 
She broke all his moments in half, 

with the kitchen door standing open. 
I am not unfamiliar with this half-life. 
But there is more to it than that. 

Heathcliff’s sexual despair 
arose out of no such experience in the life of Emily Brontë, 
so far as we know. Her question, 

which concerns the years of inner cruelty that can twist a person into a pain 
    devil, 
came to her in a kindly firelit kitchen 
(“kichin” in Emily’s spelling) where she 

and Charlotte and Anne peeled potatoes together 
and made up stories with the old house dog Keeper at their feet. 
There is a fragment 

of a poem she wrote in 1839 
(about six years before Wuthering Heights) that says: 

                            That iron man was born like me 
                            And he was once an ardent boy: 
                            He must have felt in infancy 
                            The glory of a summer sky. 

Who is the iron man? 
My mother’s voice cuts across me, 
from the next room where she is lying on the sofa. 

Is that you dear? 
Yes Ma. 
Why don’t you turn on a light in there? 

Out the kitchen window I watch the steely April sun 
jab its last cold yellow streaks 
across a dirty silver sky. 
Okay Ma. What’s for supper? 


LIBERTY 

Liberty means different things to different people. 
I have never liked lying in bed in the morning. 
Law did. 
My mother does. 

But as soon as the morning light hits my eyes I want to be out in it— 
moving along the moor 
into the first blue currents and cold navigation of everything awake. 

I hear my mother in the next room turn and sigh and sink deeper. 
I peel the stale cage of sheets off my legs 
and I am free. 

Out on the moor all is brilliant and hard after a night of frost. 
The light plunges straight up from the ice to a blue hole at the top of the sky. 
Frozen mud crunches underfoot. The sound 

startles me back into the dream I was having 
this morning when I awoke, 
one of those nightlong sweet dreams of lying in Law’s 

arms like a needle in water—it is a physical effort 
to pull myself out of his white silk hands 
as they slide down my dream hips—I 

turn and face into the wind 
and begin to run. 
Goblins, devils and death stream behind me. 

In the days and months after Law left 
I felt as if the sky was torn off my life. 
I had no home in goodness anymore. 

To see the love between Law and me 
turn into two animals gnawing and craving through one another 
towards some other hunger was terrible. 

Perhaps this is what people mean by original sin, I thought. 
But what love could be prior to it? 
What is prior? 

What is love? 
My questions were not original. 
Nor did I answer them. 

Mornings when I meditated 
I was presented with a nude glimpse of my lone soul, 
not the complex mysteries of love and hate. 

But the Nudes are still as clear in my mind 
as pieces of laundry that froze on the clothesline overnight. 
There were in all thirteen of them. 

Nude #2. Woman caught in a cage of thorns. 
Big glistening brown thorns with black stains on them 
where she twists this way and that way 

unable to stand upright. 
Nude #3. Woman with a single great thorn implanted in her forehead. 
She grips it in both hands 

endeavouring to wrench it out. 
Nude #4. Woman on a blasted landscape 
backlit in red like Hieronymus Bosch. 

Covering her head and upper body is a hellish contraption 
like the top half of a crab. 
With arms crossed as if pulling off a sweater 

she works hard at dislodging the crab. 
It was about this time 
I began telling Dr. Haw 

about the Nudes. She said, 
When you see these horrible images why do you stay with them? 
Why keep watching? Why not 

go away? I was amazed. 
Go away where? I said. 
This still seems to me a good question. 

But by now the day is wide open and a strange young April light 
is filling the moor with gold milk. 
I have reached the middle 

where the ground goes down into a depression and fills with swampy water. 
It is frozen. 
A solid black pane of moor life caught in its own night attitudes. 

Certain wild gold arrangements of weed are visible deep in the black. 
Four naked alder trunks rise straight up from it 
and sway in the blue air. Each trunk 

where it enters the ice radiates a map of silver pressures— 
thousands of hair-thin cracks catching the white of the light 
like a jailed face 

catching grins through the bars. 
Emily Brontë has a poem about a woman in jail who says 

                A messenger of Hope, comes every night to me 
                And offers, for short life, eternal Liberty. 

I wonder what kind of Liberty this is. 
Her critics and commentators say she means death 
or a visionary experience that prefigures death. 

They understand her prison 
as the limitations placed on a clergyman’s daughter 
by nineteenth-century life in a remote parish on a cold moor 

in the north of England. 
They grow impatient with the extreme terms in which she figures prison life. 
“In so much of Brontë’s work 

the self-dramatising and posturing of these poems teeters 
on the brink of a potentially bathetic melodrama,” 
says one. Another 

refers to “the cardboard sublime” of her caught world. 
I stopped telling my psychotherapist about the Nudes 
when I realized I had no way to answer her question, 

Why keep watching? 
Some people watch, that’s all I can say. 
There is nowhere else to go, 

no ledge to climb up to. 
Perhaps I can explain this to her if I wait for the right moment, 
as with a very difficult sister. 

“On that mind time and experience alone could work: 
to the influence of other intellects it was not amenable,” 
wrote Charlotte of Emily. 

I wonder what kind of conversation these two had 
over breakfast at the parsonage. 
“My sister Emily 

was not a person of demonstrative character,” Charlotte emphasizes, 
“nor one on the recesses of whose mind and feelings, 
even those nearest and dearest to her could, 

with impunity, intrude unlicensed. . . .” Recesses were many. 
One autumn day in 1845 Charlotte 
“accidentally lighted on a MS. volume of verse in my sister Emily’s    
    handwriting.” 

It was a small (4 x 6) notebook 
with a dark red cover marked 6d. 
and contained 44 poems in Emily’s minute hand. 

Charlotte had known Emily wrote verse 
but felt “more than surprise” at its quality. 
“Not at all like the poetry women generally write.” 

Further surprise awaited Charlotte when she read Emily’s novel, 
not least for its foul language. 
She gently probes this recess 

in her Editor’s Preface to Wuthering Heights. 
“A large class of readers, likewise, will suffer greatly 
from the introduction into the pages of this work 

of words printed with all their letters, 
which it has become the custom to represent by the initial and final letter 
    only—a blank 
line filling the interval.” 

Well, there are different definitions of Liberty. 
Love is freedom, Law was fond of saying. 
I took this to be more a wish than a thought 

and changed the subject. 
But blank lines do not say nothing. 
As Charlotte puts it, 

“The practice of hinting by single letters those expletives 
with which profane and violent persons are wont to garnish their discourse, 
strikes me as a proceeding which, 

however well meant, is weak and futile. 
I cannot tell what good it does—what feeling it spares— 
what horror it conceals.” 

I turn my steps and begin walking back over the moor 
towards home and breakfast. It is a two-way traffic, 

the language of the unsaid. My favourite pages 
of The Collected Works Of Emily Brontë
are the notes at the back 

recording small adjustments made by Charlotte 
to the text of Emily’s verse, 
which Charlotte edited for publication after Emily’s death. 
“Prison for strongest [in Emily’s hand] altered to lordly by Charlotte.” 


HERO 

I can tell by the way my mother chews her toast 
whether she had a good night 
and is about to say a happy thing 
or not. 

Not. 
She puts her toast down on the side of her plate. 
You know you can pull the drapes in that room, she begins. 


This is a coded reference to one of our oldest arguments, 
from what I call The Rules Of Life series. 
My mother always closes her bedroom drapes tight before going to bed at night. 

I open mine as wide as possible. 
I like to see everything, I say. 
What’s there to see? 

Moon. Air. Sunrise. 
All that light on your face in the morning. Wakes you up. 
I like to wake up. 

At this point the drapes argument has reached a delta 
and may advance along one of three channels. 
There is the What You Need Is A Good Night’s Sleep channel, 

the Stubborn As Your Father channel 
and random channel. 
More toast? I interpose strongly, pushing back my chair. 

Those women! says my mother with an exasperated rasp. 
Mother has chosen random channel. 
Women? 

Complaining about rape all the time 
I see she is tapping one furious finger on yesterday’s newspaper 
lying beside the grape jam. 

The front page has a small feature 
about a rally for International Women’s Day— 
have you had a look at the Sears Summer Catalogue? 

Nope. 
Why, it’s a disgrace! Those bathing suits— 
cut way up to here! (she points) No wonder! 

You’re saying women deserve to get raped 
because Sears bathing suit ads 
have high-cut legs? Ma, are you serious? 

Well someone has to be responsible. 
Why should women be responsible for male desire? My voice is high. 
Oh I see you’re one of Them. 

One of Whom? My voice is very high. Mother vaults it. 
And whatever did you do with that little tank suit you had last year the green 
    one? 
It looked so smart on you. 

The frail fact drops on me from a great height 
that my mother is afraid. 
She will be eighty years old this summer. 

Her tiny sharp shoulders hunched in the blue bathrobe 
make me think of Emily Brontë’s little merlin hawk Hero 
that she fed bits of bacon at the kitchen table when Charlotte wasn‘t around. 

So Ma, we’ll go—I pop up the toaster 
and toss a hot slice of pumpernickel lightly across onto her plate— 
visit Dad today? She eyes the kitchen clock with hostility. 

Leave at eleven, home again by four? I continue. 
She is buttering her toast with jagged strokes. 
Silence is assent in our code. I go into the next room to phone the taxi. 

My father lives in a hospital for patients who need chronic care 
about 50 miles from here. 
He suffers from a kind of dementia 

characterized by two sorts of pathological change 
first recorded in 1907 by Alois Alzheimer. 
First, the presence in cerebral tissue 

of a spherical formation known as neuritic plaque, 
consisting mainly of degenerating brain cells. 
Second, neurofibrillary snarlings 

in the cerebral cortex and in the hippocampus. 
There is no known cause or cure. 
Mother visits him by taxi once a week 

for the last five years. 
Marriage is for better or for worse, she says, 
this is the worse. 

So about an hour later we are in the taxi 
shooting along empty country roads towards town. 
The April light is clear as an alarm. 

As we pass them it gives a sudden sense of every object 
existing in space on its own shadow. 
I wish I could carry this clarity with me 

into the hospital where distinctions tend to flatten and coalesce. 
I wish I had been nicer to him before he got crazy. 
These are my two wishes. 

It is hard to find the beginning of dementia. 
I remember a night about ten years ago 
when I was talking to him on the telephone. 

It was a Sunday night in winter. 
I heard his sentences filling up with fear. 
He would start a sentence—about weather, lose his way, start another. 
It made me furious to hear him floundering— 

my tall proud father, former World War II navigator! 
It made me merciless. 
I stood on the edge of the conversation, 

watching him thrash about for cues, 
offering none, 
and it came to me like a slow avalanche 

that he had no idea who he was talking to. 
Much colder today I guess. . . . 
his voice pressed into the silence and broke off, 

snow falling on it. 
There was a long pause while snow covered us both. 
Well I won’t keep you, 

he said with sudden desperate cheer as if sighting land. 
I’ll say goodnight now, 
I won’t run up your bill. Goodbye. 

Goodbye. 
Goodbye. Who are you? 
I said into the dial tone. 

At the hospital we pass down long pink halls 
through a door with a big window 
and a combination lock (5—25—3) 

to the west wing, for chronic care patients. 
Each wing has a name. 
The chronic wing is Our Golden Mile 

although mother prefers to call it The Last Lap. 
Father sits strapped in a chair which is tied to the wall 
in a room of other tied people tilting at various angles. 

My father tilts least, I am proud of him. 
Hi Dad how y’doing? 
His face cracks open it could be a grin or rage 

and looking past me he issues a stream of vehemence at the air. 
My mother lays her hand on his. 
Hello love, she says. He jerks his hand away. We sit. 

Sunlight flocks through the room. 
Mother begins to unpack from her handbag the things she has brought for him, 
grapes, arrowroot biscuits, humbugs. 

He is addressing strenuous remarks to someone in the air between us. 
He uses a language known only to himself, 
made of snarls and syllables and sudden wild appeals. 

Once in a while some old formula floats up through the wash— 
You don’t say! or Happy birthday to you!— 
but no real sentence 

for more than three years now. 
I notice his front teeth are getting black. 
I wonder how you clean the teeth of mad people. 

He always took good care of his teeth. My mother looks up. 
She and I often think two halves of one thought. 
Do you remember that gold-plated toothpick 

you sent him from Harrod’s the summer you were in London? she asks. 
Yes I wonder what happened to it. 
Must be in the bathroom somewhere. 

She is giving him grapes one by one. 
They keep rolling out of his huge stiff fingers. 
He used to be a big man, over six feet tall and strong, 

but since he came to hospital his body has shrunk to the merest bone house— 
except the hands. The hands keep growing. 
Each one now as big as a boot in Van Gogh, 

they go lumbering after the grapes in his lap. 
But now he turns to me with a rush of urgent syllables 
that break off on a high note—he waits, 

staring into my face. That quizzical look. 
One eyebrow at an angle. 
I have a photograph taped to my fridge at home. 

It shows his World War II air crew posing in front of the plane. 
Hands firmly behind backs, legs wide apart, 
chins forward. 

Dressed in the puffed flying suits 
with a wide leather strap pulled tight through the crotch. 
They squint into the brilliant winter sun of 1942. 

It is dawn. 
They are leaving Dover for France. 
My father on the far left is the tallest airman, 

with his collar up, 
one eyebrow at an angle. 
The shadowless light makes him look immortal, 

for all the world like someone who will not weep again. 
He is still staring into my face. 
Flaps down! I cry. 
His black grin flares once and goes out like a match. 


HOT 

Hot blue moonlight down the steep sky. 
I wake too fast from a cellar of hanged puppies 
with my eyes pouring into the dark. 
Fumbling 

and slowly 
consciousness replaces the bars. 
Dreamtails and angry liquids 

swim back down to the middle of me. 
I t is generally anger dreams that occupy my nights now. 
This is not uncommon after loss of love— 

blue and black and red blasting the crater open. 
I am interested in anger. 
I clamber along to find the source. 

My dream was of an old woman lying awake in bed. 
She controls the house by a system of light bulbs strung above her on wires. 
Each wire has a little black switch. 

One by one the switches refuse to turn the bulbs on. 
She keeps switching and switching 
in rising tides of very hot anger. 

Then she creeps out of bed to peer through lattices 
at the rooms of the rest of the house. 
The rooms are silent and brilliantly lit 

and full of huge furniture beneath which crouch 
small creatures—not quite cats not quite rats 
licking their narrow red jaws 

under a load of time. 
I want to be beautiful again, she whispers 
but the great overlit rooms tick emptily 

as a deserted oceanliner and now behind her in the dark 
a rustling sound, comes— 
My pajamas are soaked. 

Anger travels through me, pushes aside everything else in my heart, 
pouring up the vents. 
Every night I wake to this anger, 

the soaked bed, 
the hot pain box slamming me each way I move. 
I want justice. Slam. 

I want an explanation. Slam. 
I want to curse the false friend who said I love you forever. Slam. 
I reach up and switch on the bedside lamp. Night springs 

out the window and is gone over the moor. 
I lie listening to the light vibrate in my ears 
and thinking about curses. 

Emily Brontë was good at cursing. 
Falsity and bad love and the deadly pain of alteration are constant topics in 
    her verse. 

                     Well, thou halt paid me back my love! 
                     But if there be a God above 
                     Whose arm is strong, whose word is true, 
                     This hell shall wring thy spirit too! 

The curses are elaborate: 

            There go, Deceiver, go! My hand is streaming wet; 
            My heart’s blood flows to buy the blessing—To forget! 
            Oh could that lost heart give back, back again to thine, 
            One tenth part of the pain that clouds my dark decline! 

But they do not bring her peace: 

       Vain words, vain frenzied thoughts! No ear can hear me call— 
       Lost in the vacant air my frantic curses fall. . . . 

       Unconquered in my soul the Tyrant rules me still— 
       Life bows to my control, but Love I cannot kill! 

Her anger is a puzzle. 
It raises many questions in me, 
to see love treated with such cold and knowing contempt 

by someone who rarely left home 
“except to go to church or take a walk on the hills” 
(Charlotte tells us) and who 

had no more intercourse with Haworth folk 
than “a nun has 
of the country people who sometimes pass her convent gates.” 

How did Emily come to lose faith in humans? 
She admired their dialects, studied their genealogies, 
“but with them she rarely exchanged a word.” 

Her introvert nature shrank from shaking hands with someone she met on the moor. 
What did Emily know of lover’s lies or cursive human faith? 
Among her biographers 

is one who conjectures she bore or aborted a child 
during her six-month stay in Halifax, 
but there is no evidence at all for such an event 

and the more general consensus is that Emily did not touch a man in her 31 
    years. 
Banal sexism aside, 
I find myself tempted 

to read Wuthering Heights as one thick stacked act of revenge 
for all that life withheld from Emily. 
But the poetry shows traces of a deeper explanation. 

As if anger could be a kind of vocation for some women. 
It is a chilly thought. 
                            
                              The heart is dead since infancy. 
                              Unwept for let the body go. 

Suddenly cold I reach down and pull the blanket back up to my chin. 
The vocation of anger is not mine. 
I know my source. 

It is stunning, it is a moment like no other, 
when one’s lover comes in and says I do not love you anymore. 
I switch off the lamp and lie on my back, 

thinking about Emily’s cold young soul. 
Where does unbelief begin? 
When I was young 

there were degrees of certainty. 
I could say, Yes I know that I have two hands. 
Then one day I awakened on a planet of people whose hands occasionally    
    disappear— 

From the next room I hear my mother shift and sigh and settle 
back down under the doorsill of sleep. 
Out the window the moon is just a cold bit of silver gristle low on fading banks 
    of sky. 

          Our guests are darkly lodged, I whispered, gazing through 
          The vault . . . 


THOU 

The question I am left with is the question of her loneliness. 
And I prefer to put it off. 
It is morning. 

Astonished light is washing over the moor from north to east. 
I am walking into the light. 
One way to put off loneliness is to interpose God. 

Emily had a relationship on this level with someone she calls Thou. She describes Thou as awake like herself all night 
and full of strange power. 

Thou woos Emily with a voice that comes out of the night wind. 
Thou and Emily influence one another in the darkness, 
playing near and far at once. 

She talks about a sweetness that “proved us one.” 
I am uneasy with the compensatory model of female religious experience and yet, 
there is no question, 

it would be sweet to have a friend to tell things to at night, 
without the terrible sex price to pay. 
This is a childish idea, I know. 

My education, I have to admit, has been gappy. 
The basic rules of male-female relations 
were imparted atmospherically in our family, 

no direct speech allowed. 
I remember one Sunday I was sitting in the backseat of the car. 
Father in front. 

We were waiting in the driveway for mother, 
who came around the corner of the house 
and got into the passenger side of the car 

dressed in a yellow Chanel suit and black high heels. 
Father glanced sideways at her. 
Showing a good bit of leg today Mother, he said 

in a voice which I (age eleven) thought odd. 
I stared at the back of her head waiting for what she would say. 
Her answer would clear this up. 

But she just laughed a strange laugh with ropes all over it. 
Later that summer I put this laugh together with another laugh 
I overheard as I was going upstairs. 

She was talking on the telephone in the kitchen. 
Well a woman would be just as happy with a kiss on the cheek 
most of the time but YOU KNOW MEN, 

she was saying. Laugh. 
Not ropes, thorns. 
I have arrived at the middle of the moor 

where the ground goes down into a low swampy place. 
The swamp water is frozen solid. 
Bits of gold weed 

have etched themselves 
on the underside of the ice like messages. 

                        I’ll come when thou art saddest, 
                        Laid alone in the darkened room; 
                        When the mad day’s mirth has vanished, 
                        And the smile of joy is banished, 

                         I’ll come when the heart’s real feeling 
                         Has entire, unbiased sway, 
                         And my influence o’er thee stealing 
                         Grief deepening, joy congealing, 
                         Shall bear thy soul away. 

                         Listen! ’tis just the hour, 
                         The awful time for thee: 
                         Dost thou not feel upon thy soul 
                         A flood of strange sensations roll, 
                         Forerunners of a sterner power, 
                         Heralds of me? 

Very hard to read, the messages that pass 
between Thou and Emily. 
In this poem she reverses their roles, 

speaking not as the victim but to the victim. 
It is chilling to watch Thou move upon thou, 
who lies alone in the dark waiting to be mastered. 

It is a shock to realize that this low, slow collusion 
of master and victim within one voice 
is a rationale 

for the most awful loneliness of the poet’s hour. 
She has reversed the roles of thou and Thou 
not as a display of power 

but to force out of herself some pity 
for this soul trapped in glass, 
which is her true creation. 

Those nights lying alone 
are not discontinuous with this cold hectic dawn. 
It is who I am. 

Is it a vocation of anger? 
Why construe silence 
as the Real Presence? 

Why stoop to kiss this doorstep? 
Why be unstrung and pounded flat and pine away 
imagining someone vast to whom I may vent the swell of my soul? 

Emily was fond of Psalm 130. 
“My soul waiteth on Thou more than they that watch for the morning, 
I say more than they that watch for the morning.” 

I like to believe that for her the act of watching provided a shelter, 

that her collusion with Thou gave ease to anger and desire: 
”In Thou they arc quenched as a fire of thorns,“ says the psalmist. 

But for myself I do not believe this, I am not quenched— 
with Thou or without Thou I find no shelter. 
I am my own Nude. 

And Nudes have a difficult sexual destiny. 
I have watched this destiny disclose itself 
in its jerky passage from girl to woman to who I am now, 

from love to anger to this cold marrow, 
from fire to shelter to fire. 
What is the opposite of believing in Thou— 

merely not believing in Thou? No. That is too simple. 
That is to prepare a misunderstanding. 
I want to speak more clearly. 

Perhaps the Nudes are the best way. 
Nude #5. Deck of cards. 
Each card is made of flesh. 

The living cards are days of a woman’s life. 
I see a great silver needle go flashing right through the deck once from end to 
    end. 
Nude #6 I cannot remember. 

Nude #7. White room whose walls, 
having neither planes nor curves nor angles, 
are composed of a continuous satiny white membrane 

like the flesh of some interior organ of the moon. 
It is a living surface, almost wet. 
Lucency breathes in and out. 

Rainbows shudder across it. 
And around the walls of the room a voice goes whispering, 
Be very careful. Be very careful. 

Nude #8. Black disc on which the fires of all the winds 
are attached in a row. 
A woman stands on the disc 

amid the winds whose long yellow silk flames 
flow and vibrate up through her. 
Nude #9. Transparent loam. 

Under the loam a woman has dug a long deep trench. 
Into the trench she is placing small white forms, I don’t know what they are. 
Nude #10. Green thorn of the world poking up 

alive through the heart of a woman 
who lies on her back on the ground. 
The thorn is exploding 

its green blood above her in the air. 
Everything it is it has, the voice says. 
Nude #11. Ledge in outer space. 

Space is bluish black and glossy as solid water 
and moving very fast in all directions, 
shrieking past the woman who stands pinned 

to nothing by its pressure. 
She peers and glances for some way to go, trying to lift her hand but cannot. 
Nude #12. Old pole in the wind. 

Cold currents are streaming over it 
and pulling out 
into ragged long horizontal black lines 

some shreds of ribbon 
attached to the pole. 
I cannot see how they are attached— 

notches? staples? nails? All of a sudden the wind changes 
and all the black shreds rise straight up in the air 
and tie themselves into knots, 

then untie and float down. 
The wind is gone. 
It waits. 

By this time, midway through winter, 
I had become entirely fascinated with my spiritual melodrama. 
Then it stopped. 

Days passed, months passed and I saw nothing. 
I continued to peer and glance, sitting on the rug in front of my sofa 
in the curtainless morning 

with my nerves open to the air like something skinned. 
I saw nothing. 
Outside the window spring storms came and went. 

April snow folded its huge white paws over doors and porches. 
I watched a chunk of it lean over the roof and break off 
and fall and I thought, 

How slow! as it glided soundlessly past, 
but still—nothing. No nudes. 
No Thou. 

A great icicle formed on the railing of my balcony 
so I drew up close to the window and tried peering through the icicle, 
hoping to trick myself into some interior vision, 

but all I saw 
was the man and woman in the room across the street 
making their bed and laughing. 

I stopped watching. 
I forgot about Nudes. 
I lived my life, 

which felt like a switched-off TV. 
Something had gone through me and out and I could not own it. 
“No need now to tremble for the hard frost and the keen wind. 

Emily does not feel them,” 
wrote Charlotte the day after burying her sister. 
Emily had shaken free. 

A soul can do that. 
Whether it goes to join Thou and sit on the porch for all eternity 
enjoying jokes and kisses and beautiful cold spring evenings, 

you and I will never know. But I can tell you what I saw. 
Nude #13 arrived when I was not watching for it. 
It came at night. 

Very much like Nude #1. 
And yet utterly different. 
I saw a high hill and on it a form shaped against hard air. 

It could have been just a pole with some old cloth attached, 
but as I came closer 
I saw it was a human body 

trying to stand against winds so terrible that the flesh was blowing off the bones. 
And there was no pain. 
The wind 

was cleansing the bones. 
They stood forth silver and necessary. 
It was not my body, not a woman’s body, it was the body of us all. 
It walked out of the light. 

It’s right before you drive away:
our limbs still warm with sleep,
coffee sputtering out, the north
wind, your hips pressing me
hard against the table. I like it hard
because I need to remember this.
I want to say harder. How we must
look to the road that’s gone,
to the splayed morning of cold
butter and inveterate greed.
Light comes and goes in the field.
Oranges in a bowl, garlic, radio.
In the story of us, no one wins.
Isolation is a new theme
someone says. By now
I’ve invented you. Most people
don’t like to touch dead things.
That’s what my friend tells me
when I find my fish on the floor.
It must have wanted an out.
Sometimes my desire scares me.
Sometimes I watch football
and think: four chances
is enough to get there. But 
we don’t have helmets.
I want to say harder,
I can take it, but
there’s no proof I can.


I wanted to see where beauty comes from
without you in the world, hauling my heart 
across sixty acres of northeast meadow,
my pockets filling with flowers.
Then I remembered,
it’s you I miss in the brightness
and body of every living name:
rattlebox, yarrow, wild vetch.
You are the green wonder of June,
root and quasar, the thirst for salt.
When I finally understand that people fail
at love, what is left but cinquefoil, thistle,
the paper wings of the dragonfly
aeroplaning the soul with a sudden blue hilarity?
If I get the story right, desire is continuous,
equatorial. There is still so much
I want to know: what you believe
can never be removed from us,
what you dreamed on Walnut Street
in the unanswerable dark of your childhood,
learning pleasure on your own.
Tell me our story: are we impetuous,
are we kind to each other, do we surrender
to what the mind cannot think past?
Where is the evidence I will learn
to be good at loving?
The black dog orbits the horseshoe pond
for treefrogs in their plangent emergencies.
There are violet hills,
there is the covenant of duskbirds.
The moon comes over the mountain
like a big peach, and I want to tell you
what I couldn’t say the night we rushed
North, how I love the seriousness of your fingers
and the way you go into yourself,
calling my half-name like a secret.
I stand between taproot and treespire.
Here is the compass rose
to help me live through this.
Here are twelve ways of knowing
what blooms even in the blindness
of such longing. Yellow oxeye,
viper’s bugloss with its set of pink arms
pleading do not forget me.
We hunger for eloquence.
We measure the isopleths.
I am visiting my life with reckless plenitude.
The air is fragrant with tiny strawberries.
Fireflies turn on their electric wills:
an effulgence. Let me come back
whole, let me remember how to touch you
before it is too late.


Camera Obscura

The afternoon lightening his shadow,
Fidel descends from the mountains,
the clean-shaven lawyer turned guerilla,
his eyes focused on infinity,
El Jefe Máximo con sus Barbudos,
rebels with rosary beads
on their 600-mile procession across the island
with campesinos on horseback, flatbed trucks, tanks,
a new year’s journey down the oldest roads
towards betrayal.

Ambient light. Available light

Light inside of them,
nameless isleños line El Malecón to touch Fidel,
already defining himself in black and white.
The dramatic sky moving in for the close-up
that will frame his all-night oratory,
he turns to the crowd,
variations on an enigma,
waving from his pulpit with rehearsed eloquence,
a dove on his shoulder.

This is a photograph. This is not a sign.

Flash-on camera. Celebrity portraits.

          1.     Fidel on a balcony across the street
                  from Grand Central Station,
                  an American flag above his head,
                  New York, 1959.

          2.     Fidel made small by the Lincoln Memorial,
                  Washington D.C., 1959.

          3.     Fidel learning to ski,
                  a minor black ball against a white landscape,
                  Russia, 1962.

          4.     Fidel and shotgun,
                  hunting with Nikita,
                  Russia, 1962.

Circles of Confusion

Beyond photographs,
Havana is looted and burned.
Women weep at out wailing wall,
El Paredón, where traitors are taken,
and television cameras shoot
the executions, this blood soup,
the paradoxes of our lives,
three years before I am born.

Photoflood

But it is late afternoon,
and a shower of confetti and serpentine
falls from every floor of the Havana Hilton,
where history is a giant piñata,
where at midnight, Fidel will be photographed
eating a ham sandwich.


We assemble the silver tree,
our translated lives,
its luminous branches,
numbered to fit into its body.
place its metallic roots
to decorate our first Christmas.
Mother finds herself
opening, closing the Red Cross box
she will carry into 1976
like an unwanted door prize,
a timepiece, a stubborn fact,
an emblem of exile measuring our days,
marked by the moment of our departure,
our lives no longer arranged.

Somewhere,
there is a photograph,
a Polaroid Mother cannot remember was ever taken:
I am sitting under Tia Tere’s Christmas tree,
her first apartment in this, our new world:
my sisters by my side,
I wear a white dress, black boots,
an eight-year-old’s resignation;
Mae and Mitzy, age four,
wear red and white snowflake sweaters and identical smiles,
on this, our first Christmas,
away from ourselves.

The future unreal, unmade,
Mother will cry into the new year
with Lidia and Emerito,
our elderly downstairs neighbors,
who realize what we are too young to understand:
Even a map cannot show you
the way back to a place
that no longer exists.



Tomato pies are what we called them, those days,
before Pizza came in, 
at my Grandmother’s restaurant, 
in Trenton New Jersey.
My grandfather is rolling meatballs 
in the back. He studied to be a priest in Sicily but 
saved his sister Maggie from marrying a bad guy 
by coming to America. 
Uncle Joey is rolling dough and spooning sauce. 
Uncle Joey, is always scrubbed clean, 
sobered up, in a white starched shirt, after 
cops delivered him home just hours before. 
The waitresses are helping 
themselves to handfuls of cash out of the drawer, 
playing the numbers with Moon Mullin 
and Shad, sent in from Broad Street. 1942, 
tomato pies with cheese, 25 cents. 
With anchovies, large, 50 cents. 
A whole dinner is 60 cents (before 6 pm). 
How the soldiers, bussed in from Fort Dix, 
would stand outside all the way down Warren Street, 
waiting for this new taste treat, 
young guys in uniform, 
lined up and laughing, learning Italian, 
before being shipped out to fight the last great war.


I was looking for your hair, 
black as old lava on an island   
of white coral. I dreamed it   
deserted you and came for me,   
wrapped me in its funeral ribbons   
and tied me a bow of salt. 

Here’s where I put my demise:   
desiring fire in a web of tide,   
marrying the smell of wet ashes   
to the sweet desert of your slate. 
My intelligent mammal, male 
of my species, twin sun to a world   
not of my making, you reduce me   
to the syrup of the moon, you boil   
my bones in the absence of hands. 

Where is your skin, parting me? 
Where is the cowlick under your kiss   
teasing into purple valleys? Where   
are your wings, the imaginary tail 
and its exercise? Where would I breed   
you? In the neck of my secret heart   
where you’ll go to the warmth of me   
biting into that bread where crumbs crack   
and scatter and feed us our souls; 

if only you were a stone I could   
throw, if only I could have you.


“The writer. It’s a cul-de-sac,” you wrote that 
winter of our nation’s discontent. That first time 
I found you, blue marble lying still in the trench, you, staked 
in waiting for something, anything but the cell of your small 
apartment with the fixtures never scrubbed, the seven great 
named cats you gassed in the move. I couldn’t keep them. 
You explained so I understood. And what cat never loved 
your shell-like ways, the claw of your steady fingers, firme
from the rasping of banjos and steady as it goes 
from the nose to the hair to the shaking tip. My favorite 
tale was of the owl and the pussycat in love in a china cup 
cast at sea, or in a flute more brittle, more lifelike 
and riddled with flair, the exquisite polish of its gaudy 
glaze now puzzled with heat cracks, now foamed 
opalescent as the single espresso dish you bought from 
Goodwill. What ever becomes of the heart our common 
child fashioned, red silk and golden satin, the gay glitter 
fallen from moves, our names with Love written in black 
felt pen? Who gets what? Who knows what becomes of the 
rose you carried home from Spanish Harlem that morning 
I sat waiting for the surgeon’s suction. What ever becomes 
of waiting and wanting, when the princess isn’t ready and 
the queen has missed the boat, again? Do you still write 
those old remarks etched on a page of Kandinsky’s ace 
letting go? Like: Lorna meets Oliver North and she 
kicks his butt. The dates are immaterial to me as 
salvation or a freer light bending through stallions 
in an air gone heavy with underground tunnels. Do you 
read me? Is there some library where you’ll find me, smashed 
on the page of some paper? Let it go is my morning mantra 
gone blind with the saved backing of a clock, now dark 
as an empty womb when I wake, now listening for your tick 
or the sound of white walls on a sticky street. Engines out 
the window remind me of breathing apparatus at the breaking 
of new worlds, the crash and perpetual maligning of the sand 
bar where sea lions sawed up logs for a winter cabin. I dream 
wood smoke in the morning. I dream the rank and file of used 
up chimneys, what that night must have smelled like, her mussed 
and toweled positioning, my ambulance of heart through stopped 
traffic where you picked the right corner to tell me: They think 
someone murdered her. You were there, all right, you were 
a statue carved from the stone of your birth. You were patient 
as a sparrow under leaf and as calm as the bay those light 
evenings when I envisioned you with the fishwife you loved. 
And yes, I could have done it then, kissed it off, when the scalpel 
of single star brightened and my world blazed, a dying bulb 
for the finger of a socket, like our sunsets on the Cape, fallen 
fish blood in snow, the hearts and diamonds we found and left 
alone on a New England grave. Why was the summer so long 
then? Even now a golden season stumps me and I stamp 
ants on the brilliant iced drifts. I walk a steady mile 
to that place where you left it, that solid gold band 
thrown away to a riptide in a gesture the theatrical 
love—so well. What was my role? Or did I leave it 
undelivered when they handed me the gun of my triggered 
smiles and taught me to cock it? Did I play it to the hilt 
and bleeding, did I plunge in your lap and wake to find you 
lonely in a ribbon of breathing tissue? Does this impudent 
muscle die? Does love expire? Do eternal nestings mean much 
more than a quill gone out or the spit? I spy the bank 
of frothed fog fuming with airbrushed pussies on a pink 
horizon. I scored my shoes with walking. My skill is losing. 
It’s what we do best, us ducks, us lessons on what not 
to do. 
                     Thanks for the crack, 
                                                               you wrote 
in my O.E.D. that 30th renewal when the summer snapped 
and hissed suddenly like a bullet of coal flung from a fire 
place or a dumb swallow who dove into the pit for pay. Kiss 
her, and it’s good luck. I palm this lucky trade but the soot 
never sells and I never sailed away on a gulf stream that divides 
continents from ourselves. But only half of me is cracked, the 
other is launched on a wild bob, a buoy, steadfast in storm. I may 
sail to Asia or I might waft aimlessly to Spain where my hemp 
first dried from the rain. My messages wring from the line, 
unanswered, pressed sheets from an old wash or the impression 
of a holy thing. But don’t pull no science on this shroud, the 
date will only lie. She’ll tell you it’s sacred, even sell you 
a piece of the fray. She appears on the cracked ravines of this 
country like a ghost on the windshield of an oncoming 
train. She refuses to die, but just look at her nation 
without a spare penny to change. My wear is a glass made 
clean through misuse, the mishandling of my age as revealing 
as my erased face, Indian head of my stick birth, my battle 
buried under an island of snow I’ve yet to get to. What could I do 
with this neighborhood of avenues scattered with empty shells 
of mailboxes, their feet caked with cement like pulled up 
pilings? Evidently, they haven’t a word 
                                                       for regret 
                                                                     full heart. 
Someday, I said, I can write us both from this mess. But the key 
stalls out from under me when I spell your name. I have to fake 
the O or go over it again in the dark, a tracing of differences 
spilled out on a sheet. If I could stick this back 
together, would it stay? It’s no rope, I know, and no good 
for holding clear liquid. I gather a froth on my gums, and grin 
the way an old woman grimaces in a morning mirror. I was never 
a clear thing, never felt the way a daughter feels, never lost 
out like you, never drove. My moon waits at the edge 
of an eagle’s aerie, almost extinct and the eggs are fragile 
from poisoned ignitions. I’m never coming out from my cup 
of tea, never working loose the grease in my hair, the monkey 
grease from my dancing elbows that jab at your shoulder. 
But I write, and wait for the book to sell, for I know 
nothing comes of it but the past with its widening teeth, 
with its meat breath baited at my neck, persistent as the smell 
of a drunk. Don’t tell me. I already know. It’s just the rule of 
the game for the jack of all hearts, and for the queen of baguettes; 
it’s a cul-de-sac for a joker drawing hearts.


Last night I found my face below
the water in my cupped hands.

The mask made of copper and bone
criss-crossing to make a smirk,

a false glamour, a plated glaze.
I unwound myself from the heavy

machinery of my body's burden.
The lute, the light, chime.
 
I'll get up and partner myself
with music, the purple moon

peeling itself like a plum.
Men stand in a circle and

they will ask and ask again.
I want to pick the thick bud,

to lose myself in the body's posture
bending in or away, to let

my majesty and birthright go 
and gesture toward a waking life.

I am haunted by how much our mothers do not know.
How a republic falls because of its backhanded deals,
stairwell secrets. My mother does not know I am lying
with a man who is darker than me, that we do not
have names for how we truly treat our bodies.
What we do with them. The other possesses me.
Without him the perception of me fails to exist.
My mother now is taking her sheers and cutting
through live shrimp. When I was a child she peeled
each flushed grape until only the pale fleshy bead
remained. She placed them onto a plate in one shining
mound, deseeded, in front of me. How I sucked and bled
the fruit of all their juice, hypnotized in front of the buzz
of television in each version of my childhood. I am
her daughter. This is certain. I am lying down with a man
who is darker than me and maybe this poem is my
real republic, my face is my face, or is it stolen from
my mother and hung over mine? If I were a dream
you could say my countenance was a string of flickering lights
made of teeth or an expression unraveling like a carpet
into a narrow river of another life. Does truth matter
when it's floating face up or face down?
The answer to this makes all the difference.


I am looking for the photo that would make all the difference in my life. It’s very small and subject to fits of amnesia, turning up in poker hands, grocery carts, under the unturned stone. The photo shows me at the lost and found looking for an earlier photo, the one that would have made all the difference then. My past evades me like a politician. Wielding a fly-swatter, it destroys my collection of cereal boxes, my childhood lived close to the breakfast table. Only that photo can help me locate my fourteen lost children, who look just like me. When I call the Bureau of Missing Persons, they say, “Try the Bureau of Missing Photos.” They have a fine collection. Here’s one of Calvin Coolidge’s seventh wedding. Here’s one of a man going over a cliff on a dogsled. Here’s my Uncle Arthur the night he bought the prize peacock. O photo! End your tour of the world in a hot air balloon. Resign your job at the mirror-testing laboratory. Come home to me, you little fool, before I find I can live without you.


Black swollen fruit dangling on a limb
Red forgotten flesh sprayed across the prairie
Parched brown vines creeping over the wall
Yellow winged pollen, invisible enemies
 Boluses without homesteads, grubs without a voice
Burrowed deeply into this land’s dark, dark heart
Someday, our pods and pupae shall turn in the earth
And burgeon into our motherlode’s bold beauty
We’re a seed on the manure, on the sole of your shoe
We’re the louse trapped in your hank of golden hair
We’re the sliver that haunts beneath your thumbnail
We the church mouse you scorched with a match but lived
 
We’re the package wrapped, return address unknown
We’re the arm lowered again, again, a bloodied reverie
We’ve arrived shoeless, crutchless, tousle-haired, swollen-bellied
We shall inherit this earth’s meek glory, as foretold
(For Leah, my niece)
They gave you a title, but you were too proud to wear it
They gave you the paterland, but you were too lazy to farm it
Your condo is leaking, but you’re too angry to repair it
Your dress has moth holes, but you’re too sentimental to toss it
You’re too bored to play the lute, it hangs on the wall like an ornament
The piano bites you, it’s an eight-legged unfaithful dog
Love grows in the garden, but you’re too impudent to tend it
A nice Hakka boy from Ogden, so hardworking, so kind
The prayer mat is for prayer, not for catamite nipple-piercing
The Goddess wags her finger at your beautiful wasteland
A dream deferred, well, is a dream deferred
(Janie’s retort, on her fortieth birthday)
 The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun pecks her heat at the horizon
The same housing tract, the same shopping center
The same blunt haircut: Chinese, Parisian, Babylonion
The same lipstick: red and it comes off on your coffeecup
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun tarries in the late noon sky
The same word for mom: Ah ma, madre, mere, majka
The same birthbabe: bald, purplish, you slap to make cry
The same stench: mother’s milk, shit and vomit
The same argument between a man and a woman
The same dog, hit by a car, the same escaped canary
The same turkey for Thanksgiving, Christmas and the New Year
The same three-tiered freeway: Istanbul, Tokyo, San Diego
The same hill, the same shanty town, the same lean-to
The same skyscraper: Hong Kong, Singapore, Toledo
The same soup: chicken, though the veggies may vary
The same rice for supper: white, brown or wild
The same stars come around and around and around
The same sun dips her head into the ocean
The same tree in the same poem by the same poet
The same old husband: saggy breasts, baggy thighs
The same blackness whether we sleep or die
Whoever abandoned her grandmother at the bus stop
Whoever ran in and out the door like a blind wind
   spinning the upside-down prosperity sign right side up again
Whoever lost her virtue    in darkly paneled rooms    with white boys
Whoever prayed for round eyes
   and taped her eyelids in waiting
Whoever wore platform shoes
   blustering taller than her own kind
Whoever sold her yellow gold for Jehovah
Whoever discarded her jade Buddha for Christ
Why are you proud, father, entombed with the other woman?
Why are you proud, mother, knitting my shroud in heaven?
Why are you proud, fish, you feed the greedy mourners?
Why are you proud, peonies, your heads are bowed and weighty?
Why are you proud, millennium, the dialect will die with you?
Why are you proud, psalm, hammering yourself into light?


I hate, I love, I don’t know how
I’m biracial, I’m torn in two
 Tonight, he will lock me in fear
In the metal detector of love
Rapeflowers, rapeseeds, rapiers
A soldier’s wry offerings
He will press his tongue
Into my neighing throat
I can speak three dialects badly
I want you now behind the blue door
In a slow hovercraft of dreams
I saw Nanking from a bilge
Some ashes fell on his lap
I’m afraid it’s my mother
The protocol is never to mention her
While we are fucking
The bad conceit, the bad conceit police will arrest you
Twin compasses, twin compasses cannot come
Your father is not a car, not a compass and not God
Though he vanished in his sky-blue convertible Galaxy with a blonde
He kept crawling back to us, back to us
Each time with a fresh foot mangled
One emperor was named Lickety, the other named Split
Suddenly, the soup of chaos makes sense
Refugees roaming from tent to tent to tent, looking for love
The banknote is a half note, an octave above God
O the great conjugator of curses: shit, shat, have shut!
I have loved you both bowl-cut and shagged
There are days when the sun is a great gash
Nights, the moon smokes hashish and falls asleep on your lap
Sorry, but your morphing was not satisfactory
Shapeshifter, you choked on your magic scarf
I heard this joke at the bar
An agnostic dyslexic insomniac stayed up all night searching for doG
The prosperity sign flips right side up again
The Almanac says this Ox Year we’ll toil like good immigrants
Horse is frigid. Mule can’t love
Salmon dead at the redd
One leg is stationary, the other must tread, must tread, must tread
The Triads riddled him, then us
What is the heart’s past participle?
She would have loved not to have loved
I bought you at the corner of Agave and Revolucíon
You wrapped yourself thrice around my green arm and shat!
A childless woman can feel the end of all existence
Look, on that bloody spot, Chrysanthemum!
 
Shamanka, fetch your grandmother at the bus stop
Changeling, you are the one I love

if mama 
could see 
she would see   
lucy sprawling   
limbs of lucy 
decorating the 
backs of chairs 
lucy hair 
holding the mirrors up   
that reflect odd   
aspects of lucy. 
if mama 
could hear 
she would hear 
lucysong rolled in the 
corners like lint 
exotic webs of lucysighs 
long lucy spiders explaining   
to obscure gods. 
if mama 
could talk 
she would talk 
good girl   
good girl   
good girl 
clean up your room.


hey music and 
me 
only white, 
hair a flutter of 
fall leaves 
circling my perfect 
line of a nose, 
no lips, 
no behind, hey 
white me 
and i’m wearing 
white history 
but there’s no future 
in those clothes 
so i take them off and 
wake up 
dancing. 


My name mocks me
for I was born at the cost
of my mother’s life,
earning my father’s hatred
with my first breath.
All my life
I have scoured a house soiled
with the thick soot of his resentment.
It has left its mark on the walls,
in his eyes, and on me.
All of it I have tried to wipe away.
In my hands I hold a broom,
in my heart—
ashes, ashes.


It is a dangerous thing
to forget the climate of your birthplace,
to choke out the voices of dead relatives
when in dreams they call you
by your secret name.
It is dangerous
to spurn the clothes you were born to wear
for the sake of fashion; dangerous
to use weapons and sharp instruments
you are not familiar with; dangerous
to disdain the plaster saints
before which your mother kneels
praying with embarrassing fervor
that you survive in the place you have chosen to live:
a bare, cold room with no pictures on the walls,
a forgetting place where she fears you will die
of loneliness and exposure.
Jesús, María, y José, she says, 
el olvido is a dangerous thing.


the winged thang built her dream palace
amid the fine green eyes of a sheltering bough
she did not know it was urban turf
disguised as serenely delusionally rural
nor did she know the neighborhood was rife
with slant-mawed felines and those long-taloned
swoopers of prey. she was ignorant of the acidity & oil
that slowly polluted the earth, and was never
to detect the serpent coiled one strong limb below

following her nature she flitted and dove
for whatever blades twigs and mud
could be found under the humming blue
and created a hatchery for her spawn
not knowing all were doomed


and then there are the one-hit zombies
cursed to an eternity of Monday nights

who runs our music does not make it
controls manufacture and marketing of rhythm
schemes on and fixes the charts. it’s polyphonic
from the dark of the chitlin to solid gold dawn
doublecrossed over

a love come down
after the plunge
sloshing around in limbo
that too sweet gospel splash
of July
bagpipes big mad Hitchcockian crows
siren families striding hurrying
want a whole lot of love           sings the Joplin
mimic            white birch         willow swings          pollen
the cars in shade
way way down gonna give you my love
staying in the house
the crows outside are winning
car door       a muffled crowd gasp      wheels at the top of the sky
and waits
the night sky's visuals
called          "Untamed Retribution"        and "Rain Fire"
an objective       sincerity         the war does not space itself
two teenage             girls at the screen           with the sun in their eyes
all day   time takes
all the time         bright canisters in the culverts         girls read
hills of it
day-long trash truck heads down our street
what a big
engine        emergency brake
distance between        telephone pole and queen palm's trunk
smoke loops      from back of the house to front
leaves no signet              in cloud                 sidewalk's scalding path 
'neath county's ripe 
corn table 
globe's eggshell
for romance    the girls layer their tears back into their skin
many dawns     the boys waving 
bends
air crosses clouds in hot nets
increasing          the local tenor's uprightness
fumes exhume
the crowd stands open-mouthed 
heads lifted
you 
you 
you 
you
you 
and 
you 
send me
smoke falls through each head of hair
to each ear's
size and limit
love
sound-chamber'd
moon's
far off
place


Once you said joking slyly, If I’m killed 
I’ll come to haunt your solemn bed, 
I’ll stand and glower at the head 
And see if my place is empty still, or filled.
What was it woke me in the early darkness 
Before the first bird’s twittering? 
—A shape dissolving and flittering 
Unsteady as a flame in a drafty house. 
It seemed a concentration of the dark burning 
By the bedpost at my right hand 
While to my left that no man’s land 
Of sheet stretched palely as a false morning.... 
All day I have been sick and restless. This evening 
Curtained, with all the lights on, 
I start up—only to sit down. 
Why should I grieve after ten years of grieving? 
What if last night I was the one who lay dead 
While the dead burned beside me 
Trembling with passionate pity 
At my blameless life and shaking its flamelike head?


Tom, will you let me love you in your restaurant?
I will let you make me a sandwich of your invention and I will eat it and call 
it a carolyn sandwich. Then you will kiss my lips and taste the mayon­naise and 
that is how you shall love me in my restaurant
Tom, will you come to my empty beige apartment and help me set up my daybed?
Yes, and I will put the screws in loosely so that when we move on it, later, 
it will rock like a cradle and then you will know you are my baby
Tom, I am sitting on my dirt bike on the deck. Will you come out from the kitchen
and watch the people with me?
Yes, and then we will race to your bedroom. I will win and we will tangle up 
on your comforter while the sweat rains from our stomachs and fore­heads
Tom, the stars are sitting in tonight like gumball gems in a little girl’s 
jewelry box. Later can we walk to the duck pond?
Yes, and we can even go the long way past the jungle gym. I will push you on 
the swing, but promise me you’ll hold tight. If you fall I might disappear
Tom, can we make a baby together? I want to be a big pregnant woman with a 
loved face and give you a squalling red daughter. 
No, but I will come inside you and you will be my daughter
Tom, will you stay the night with me and sleep so close that we are one person? 
No, but I will lie down on your sheets and taste you. There will be feathers 
of you on my tongue and then I will never forget you
Tom, when we are in line at the convenience store can I put my hands in your 
back pockets and my lips and nose in your baseball shirt and feel the crook 
of your shoulder blade? 
No, but later you can lie against me and almost touch me and when I go I will 
leave my shirt for you to sleep in so that always at night you will be pressed 
up against the thought of me
Tom, if I weep and want to wait until you need me will you promise that someday 
you will need me?
No, but I will sit in silence while you rage, you can knock the chairs down 
any mountain. I will always be the same and you will always wait
Tom, will you climb on top of the dumpster and steal the sun for me? It’s just 
hanging there and I want it. 
No, it will burn my fingers. No one can have the sun: it’s on loan from God. 
But I will draw a picture of it and send it to you from Richmond and then you 
can smooth out the paper and you will have a piece of me as well as the sun
Tom, it’s so hot here, and I think I’m being born. Will you come back from
Richmond and baptise me with sex and cool water?
I will come back from Richmond. I will smooth the damp spiky hairs from the 
back of your neck and then I will lick the salt off it. Then I will leave
Tom, Richmond is so far away. How will I know how you love me? 
I have left you. That is how you will know


Tired of waiting for him, I think of a plan to stick it to the 
Man—he waylaid me with promises: protection, his valuable keys. 
Nights of seduction, I would glide to the curb in my customized Eldorado, 
black finish and cool bubble top 
and turn it over to a superyoung girl with rags and a bucket of soapy 
water, with a smile and a dead president, make it shine my sister. 
He is inside listening to Curtis, his sapphire ring 
he brings the moon with him, this cat, and his eyes glow like 
mellow stones at my superfly threads. The cashmere white stitched suit, 
the maxi coat trimmed in fox fur: vixen, 
my pretty little hat with three blue feather plumes. I let him dig me for a while, 
and lay a kiss, a spoon of cocaine on him, our secret meetings 
a potent rush and I am hip to the hit to his fly hand on my thigh, 
my ladies scatter in a cloud of Opium and he tells me, 
you know me, I’m your friend. 
I thought he was my man—I flash on him in the bathtub, its ledge of oils in flasks, 
pulling a loofah sponge over my tired shoulders, passing a reefer in lemon paper, 
on all the tired bitches working his keys, hustling his diamond rocks— 
two sets of false eyelashes, micro minis, freezing their asses off. 
My .25 Beretta can’t stop him, it’s not real, I’m not real to him. He’ll 
use me up and kill me; I need brains guts and cool; 
I put fur on your back, my baby, he says. 
I am between him and death, the greatest high of all, and I ask him to step outside. 
The pink flakes blow my mind and I turn to him with a flurry of karate kicks, 
kicking out my left leg I bring him to the ground 
and with my foot on the collar of his mohair suit I tell him, I took your 
money and signed a contract on you: I hired the best killers there are— 
men like you—yeah, if one hair on my gorgeous head is harmed, it’s all over for you. 
It’s all over for you, I think, as I imagine I am Superfly; my mind is what I want it to be, 
the Man is tired and suddenly he looks 
old, very, very old as he turns away from me, the things he cannot dream— 
my brazen plans, my body full of love.


It begins with Diane—the gold shingles of her razored hair 
alight in the wind that whips the trees, 
the cotton slips pinned to nylon lines: these improbable ghosts. 
The first I ever loved can still incite such desperation. Betrayal 
lashes the careful stitches, the slight fabric; 
its design undone. 
She would take her switchblade and cut spiders in half— 
a quadrant of scars radiating from her wrists and elbows, she wrote my name in blood, 
let matches flare against the cuts 
small yellow head, searing. I used to operate on myself, she said. 
Separate a triangle of skin and place objects—silver pin 
heads, glass beads    close to the bone. 
A private surgical kit, embroidery scissors, alcohol, fine needles, and 
violet thread; silk, cat whiskers tied in complicated bows. She 
remembers this way, where things are 
where they are buried. We studied history together, this is how we met. Recovering the Roman 
Empire; she draws military disasters in her margins, mail clad horsemen pitching 
violently to the ground, the movement of the cavalry 
a swarm of locusts. Her silver compact slit open, because there are assassins in the narrow hallway; 
her fine pale feet turn to form an arabesque (a delicate design of flowers, 
leaves), furrows in the sheets and mattress, 
pearls. Ropes of black pearls and a black rubber dress—submerged in the green haze, 
the depths of a nightclub, listening. Submission; she hit his thighs with a chain, a hook in his mouth 
her lips were alluring. Red feather quills, bright red flies. I think of him, brought violently
to the surface, his tensile body still below the thin edge of the filleting knife 
his slick flesh streaming as he surrenders—a ceremony of scales and gills, useless to him now, 
as he breathes in and out. She told me once that she was like a scorpion, and I did not listen. 
I let her creep between my fingers, and danger was exotic to me then. I lived somewhere deep 
beyond the coastline, in the crevices of rocks and wood planks, 
her gold hair spins like loose coins, strange and valuable. The currency of nightmares, where 
the sun burns the earth and empties the seas—there are skeletons, gingerly reaching for night 
night will fall in a rustle of wings, the gentle sweep of the legs of scorpions.


Don’t tell me the cat ate your math sheet, 
And your spelling words went down the drain, 
And you couldn’t decipher your homework, 
Because it was soaked in the rain. 

Don’t tell me you slaved for hours 
On the project that’s due today, 
And you would have had it finished 
If your snake hadn’t run away. 

Don’t tell me you lost your eraser, 
And your worksheets and pencils, too, 
And your papers are stuck together 
With a great big glob of glue. 

I’m tired of all your excuses; 
They are really a terrible bore. 
Besides, I forgot my own work, 
At home in my study drawer.


Like people
emerging from a steambath,
bending over,
steaming from their heads
and shoulders,
the ring of the mountains
from the Chilkat Range
to the Juneau ice field
as if in steambath towels
of snow flurries;
at their feet
are foaming white caps of sea
like water thrown on rocks
steaming from the heat.


My grandmother Eliza
was the family surgeon.
Her scalpel made from a pocketknife
she kept in a couple of pinches of snoose.
She saved my life by puncturing
my festering neck twice with her knife.
She saved my brother’s life twice
when his arm turned bad.
The second time she saved him
was when his shoulder turned bad.
She always made sure
she didn’t cut an artery.
She would feel around for days
finding the right spot to cut.
When a doctor found out
she saved my brother’s life
he warned her,
“You know you could go to jail for this?”

Her intern, my Auntie Anny, saved my life
when I cut a vessel on my toe.
While my blood was squirting out
she went out into the night
and cut and chewed the bark
of plants she knew.
She  put the granules of chewed up bark
on my toe before the eyes of the folks
who came to console my mother
because I was bleeding to death.
Grandma’s other intern, Auntie Jennie,
saved our uncle’s life when his son
shot him through the leg by accident.
A doctor warned her, too,
when he saw how she cured.
Her relative cured herself of diabetes.
Now, the doctors keep on asking,
“How did you cure yourself?”

Reader unmov’d and Reader unshaken, Reader unseduc’d   
and unterrified, through the long-loud and the sweet-still   
I creep toward you. Toward you, I thistle and I climb. 

I crawl, Reader, servile and cervine, through this blank   
season, counting—I sleep and I sleep. I sleep, 
Reader, toward you, loud as a cloud and deaf, Reader, deaf 

as a leaf. Reader: Why don’t you turn 
pale? and, Why don’t you tremble? Jaded, staid   
Reader, You—who can read this and not even 

flinch. Bare-faced, flint-hearted, recoilless   
Reader, dare you—Rare Reader, listen   
and be convinced: Soon, Reader, 

soon you will leave me, for an italian mistress:   
for her dark hair, and her moon-lit   
teeth. For her leopardi and her cavalcanti, 

for her lips and clavicles; for what you want   
to eat, eat, eat. Art-lover, rector, docent!   
Do I smile? I, too, once had a brash artless 

feeder: his eye set firm on my slackening 
sky. He was true! He was thief! In the celestial sense   
he provided some, some, some 

(much-needed) relief. Reader much-slept with, and Reader I will die 
without touching, You, Reader, You: mr. small- 
weed, mr. broad-cloth, mr. long-dark-day. And the italian mis- 

fortune you will heave me for, for 
her dark hair and her moonlit-teeth. You will love her well in- 
to three-or-four cities, and then, you will slowly 

sink. Reader, I will never forgive you, but not, poor   
cock-sure Reader, not, for what you think. O, Reader   
Sweet! and Reader Strange! Reader Deaf and Reader 

Dear, I understand youyourself may be hard- 
pressed to bare this small and un-necessary burden   
having only just recently gotten over the clean clean heart- 

break of spring. And I, Reader, I am but the daughter   
of a tinker. I am not above the use of bucktail spinners,   
white grubs, minnow tails. Reader, worms 

and sinkers. Thisandthese curtail me   
to be brief: Reader, our sex gone 
to wildweather. YesReaderYes—that feels much-much 

better. (And my new Reader will come to me empty- 
handed, with a countenance that roses, lavenders, and cakes.   
And my new Reader will be only mildly disappointed. 

My new Reader can wait, can wait, can wait.) Light- 
minded, snow-blind, nervous, Reader, Reader, troubled, Reader, 
what’d ye lack? Importunate, unfortunate, Reader: 

You are cold. You are sick. You are silly.
Forgive me, kind Reader, forgive me, I had not intended to step this quickly this far 
back. Reader, we had a quiet wedding: he&I, theparson 

&theclerk. Would I could, stead-fast, gracilefacile Reader! Last,   
good Reader, tarry with me, jessa-mine Reader. Dar- 
(jee)ling, bide! Bide, Reader, tired, and stay, stay, stray Reader, 

true. R.: I had been secretly hoping this would turn into a love 
poem. Disconsolate. Illiterate. Reader,   
I have cleared this space for you, for you, for you.



“i” has not found, started, finished “i’s” morning poem,
the poem “i” was writing about “i” having sex with the man “i” left her husband for
the night before or maybe just this morning.
a sex poem, so to speak, so to say, so as to lay...
a foundation for...
what????????

SEX

i lost my sex /poem!
how did it go?
i know it was called 

SEX

something about my bosky acres,
my unshrubb’d down
‘bout all being tight and yare

(bring in tiresias?)
did you say soothe?
tiresias, who lies fucking more?
whoops. 

who likes fucking more?

(“bring in // the old thought //(allen grossman doing yeats)
that life prepares us for//what never happens”)

today (the color of )my sex 
was lavender then yellow 
gold then muted mossy grey and green

i bid my lover
lower
i bid my lover shhhhhhh

i bid my lover 
linger
i bid my 
lover, go

lover, go!
(see!)

i bid my lover stay
away

“i” notices it is almost time to pick up her children from school!
“i” realizes she has gotten nowhere, nowhere near it, much less inside it, wasted another morning, can’t fucking write a poem to save “i’s” life, oh well,
“i” is, at least,“working”.
“i” pulls on her tight jeans, her big boots, her puffy parka.
“i” remote starts her car.
“i’s” car is a 1995 red toyota 4-runner with racing stripe that doesn’t have enough power for “i”.
“i’s” car stereo also doesn’t have enough power for “i”.
“i” drives cross town listening to dylan, who has plenty of power for “i”.
“i” wonders how why dylan isn’t “i’s” man.
“i” gets some looks from some lesser men, some in better, more powerful trucks, even though “i’s” dirty dirty-blonde hair is covered by a woolen cap.
“i” feels the power of being a single mom in a red truck.
“i” knows it is not enough power.
“i” thinks “i am the man, i suffered, i was there”.
“i” is almost broke, but
“i” thinks “i live more in a continuous present that i enjoy”.
“i” thinks “amor fati”.
“i” notices the chugach mountains.
“i” notices the chugach mountains sometimes look good and sometimes bad.
“i” remembers that yesterday the chugach mountains looked desolate and dirty and roadblocky.
“i” notices the chugach mountains look particularly beautiful today covered in sun and snow.
“i” almost thinks “bathed in sun and snow” but stops herself.
“i” feels that “i” can maybe find, really start, really finish her sex poem tomorrow.
“i” likes the dubus thing about adultery having a morality of its own.
“i” also likes “human drama”.
“i” really enjoyed “i heart huckabees”.
“i” thought sex was overrated for a long time, then not for a year and a half, and now, again.
“i” gives, well, has given, good head.
“i” takes it like a man.
“i” thinks there should be a new “new sexualized and radicalized poetry of the self”,
“i” knows the “single-minded frenzy of a raving madman” but,
“i” mostly keeps her head.
“i” remembers that “as long ago as 1925, boris tomashevsky, a leading russian formalist critic, observed that the “autobiographical poem” is one that mythologizes the poet’s life in accordance with the conventions of his time. it relates not what has occurred but what should have occurred, presenting an idealized image of the poet as representative of his literary school”
“i” wants to be a man like marjorie perloff, helen hennessy vendler, boris tomashevsky.
“i” thinks, on the other hand, “i mean i like in art when the artist doesn’t know what he knows in general; he only knows what he knows specifically”.
“i” thinks: “that mantel piece is clean enough or my name isn’t bob rauschenberg”.
“i” just wishes “i” could talk more smarter theory, no
“i” just wishes “i” could write more smarter poems, no
“i” thinks “WHY I AM A POET AND NOT A...”
“i” thinks “KALYTIAK DAVIS PAINTS A PICTURE”.
“i” wants to include the word “coruscate” in it, and, possibly, a quote from rudolf steiner.
“i” wishes she could remember abrams definition of the structure of the greater romantic lyric, but that it presents “ a determinate speaker in a particularized, and usually localized outdoor setting, whom we overhear as he carries on, in a fluent vernacular which rises easily to a more formal speech, a sustained colloquy, sometimes with himself or with the outer scene, but more frequently with a silent human auditor, present or absent.” and that “he speaker begins with a description of the landscape;’ and that “an aspect or change of aspect in the landscape evokes a varied but integral process of memory, thought anticipation, and feeling which remains closely involved with the outer scene.” and that  “in the course of this meditation the lyric speaker achieves an insight, faces up to a tragic loss, comes to a moral decision or resolves an emotional problem.” and that “often the poem rounds upon itself to end where it began, at the outer scene, but with an altered mood and deepened  understanding which is the result of the intervening meditation” evades her.
“i” wants to say “silent human auditor, are you absent or present?” but “i” knows “i” makes, has made, that move too often.
“i” knows “i” is alone in her red truck.
“i” reconsiders, perhaps it is like giving good head?
“i’ thinks his his he himself, but not too bitterly, then
“i” thinks “i”, then,
“i” thinks “you”.
“i” has not told her lover that “i” is not in love with him any longer, but “i” knows he knows, must know.
“i” has not told her lover that “i” had a long conversation with “i’s” x-husband on the phone last night.
“i” thinks “my sidestepping and obliquities”.
“i” thinks love is what went wrong.
“i” feels elizabeth bishop reprimanding “i”.
“i” thinks like a gentle loving firm almost slap but really just a squeeze of, not on, the hand from a, the, mother neither one of them had for very long, long enough.
“i” has not thought of “i’s” dead mother in a long time.
‘i” thinks of jonatham letham and his dead mother and his wall of books.
“i” thinks of mark reagan and his walls and walls of books, and how his landlord, fearing collapse, made him move to the bottom floor.
“i” thinks of doug teter and his smaller, but still, wall of books.
“i” thinks of jude law.
“i” thinks jude law probably doesn’t know how to read.
“i” knows that no lover can be her “objective correlative”, still
“i” thinks “so true a lover as theagenes”.
“i” thinks “so constant a friend as pylades”.
“i” thinks “so valiant a man as orlando”.
“i ” thinks “so right a prince as xenophon’s cyrus”
“i” thinks “so excellent a man in every way as virgil’s aeneas”.
“i” notices dylan is almost done singing “to ramona”.
“i” loves “everything passes, everything changes, just do what you think you should do.”
“i” thinks dylan is singing to “i” .
“i” thinks he means now, and now, and now; daily.
“i” is almost there.
“i” wonders if “i’s” meditation is too long, has gotten away from “i”.
“i” thinks it should take precisely as long as the ride: 15 minutes tops; well, 30  in a snowstorm.
“i” knows it is not snowing.
“i wonders if “i” should at this point even refer to “i’s” meditation.
“i” thinks “man can embody truth but he cannot know it”.
“i” thinks “especially under stress of psychological crisis”.
“i” thinks what’s worse, anaphora or anaphrodesia?
“i” thinks of the diaphragm still inside her. 
“i” shutters at the audacity of her sex. 
“i” is exactly on time to pick up her daughter. 
“i” must wait another 45 minutes to retrieve her son.
“i” will try and remember to remove it promptly when they get back to “i’s” house, i.e. home. 
“i” has fucked with the facts so “you” think she’s robert lowell. (but whoever saw a girl like robert lowell?)
“i” doesn’t care if “you”, silent human auditor, present or absent, never heard of, could give a flying fuck about, robert lowell.



Roslyn has nothing going
nothing to fight for
no work to do
she couldn’t name one desire
that is not someone else’s
or a man

she cannot claim
where she came from
will not claim who she is
or the way she cries
so no one can see

she has no work to do
cannot finish books
feed herself
or go out alone
she is always late
not to sit alone somewhere
and wait
she wouldn’t know what to do

Roslyn doesn’t want a thing
but she waits for something anyway
she has no work to do
she holds off interests
passions and opinions
everything but the facts
and these come to her
from dramas and the papers

she agrees with fiction
and what people say
i wouldn’t trust her in court
or on my back
a woman without a dream
is a fault in the earth
all steam and liquid fire

Roslyn goes to work
has a job
but no calling
waits for the word
to call herself
no one ever remembers her name
or where they saw her
she waits to be told
she’s the only one

her tyranny is silent
small and sexual
her losses are great
she has not called herself
said, “I’m here, now, deal with me”

Roslyn wouldn’t hurt a fly
but people fear her sleep
her unconscious
the primal whatever
that wants to play
it might have guns out
for the rest of us



the streets of hell are also paved
with fear of contagion
I have been swimming
in enough barbed-wire waters to know
you’re not even safe on the beach
it’s not just your “body fluids”
it’s the grime of your skin
those dirty things you think

they are cleaning up the world again
I can see the inflammation
heartbreak & hunger scurry me down
on the road to Damascus
I want to be blinded like Saul
for the sake of vision
not just cause I can’t take it anymore

are we talking burnt out here?
burnt out is a reason for infection
I hope I get the whole disease
I am glad to be a speck / a piece of dirt
the dark side of the earth
they’re trying to clean
I want to get in their pores
want them to sweat my filth
the way a wound hurts before the dope
but then come the murderers on the road
are we talking burnt out?
they go in the camps looking for you
cause you are hiding the sores
you could be contagious
after all in the postapocalypse movies
you don’t even exist

your survival is not required
for history or hollywood
in the movie Road Warrior
everyone is antisocial on purpose
human ties are burnt out
& human intercourse is fatiguing & dangerous
gratefully no one is traumatized anymore
& unfortunately no one goes to school

in the movie Blade Runner
almost everyone lives 90 stories below
almost no one else
everyone is antisocial by accident
due to overcrowding in L.A. but no one minds
& there are still parties to go to

everyone white is “off-world” more or less
everyone 90 stories down is polymorphous colored
more or less
no one has attended school in decades
in both films everyone dresses with panache
which preserves their identities
to audiences who know
there is no grounds for indentity
postworld

personally I prefer the people in Titanic
even though they got their minds blown
when the unbelievable happened
they still believed in life
they were not burnt out
& had grounds for clinging
to lifeboats and a certain
stylish way of dressing

they could not imagine Jim Jensen
intoning without horror
that the body count goes on
that no one needs the news to know
what’s going on
Beirut is one of the low levels
Dante went on about
available in ordinary life

see the corpses if you will
believe at the risk
you may see it everywhere
every body spreads infection
unless you burn it out
eyewitness news invites you
to wait for the coverage
because Jim Jensen is there
& history is in the making or
you can come skinny-dip
in my gene pool

the massacres were arbitrary
when my people were hunted down
the deaths still go on
stretching over centuries
of shades of brown
baptist, moslem,
mothers, children, fathers
burnt out of homes but living

I am not that desperate
to be numb & dumb
I’m walking 90 stories down
I know I survive
in some wretched moments
of what men do
but I am not that desperate
I don’t give a shit if this is history
in the making
it should stop

I am still alive
I am still happy to be the dirt
that can’t be cleaned up
scorch my earth & I will grow
from history up
under the feet of the present
burnt out is for the movies
in which we don’t exist


because I go 
          like the professed 
                 sinner repentant 
to the altar 
of your baptismal flame 
         I am saved 

despite your 
                        sculptor-love 
whose whimsy kneads 
                                             and molds 
                                             and fires
then breaks 
the free-form 
of my fasting body
                                             to make 
                                             me whole
yet thankful 
I accept
                these carnal gifts
                of you 
                              Eros 
and wear them 
as I would
flawless jewels 

               (how can you 
                know that I 
                have bled
                the way 
                and back 
                biting the dust 
                to wear 
                your name?) 

. . . the wound lies 
                                                not
in your infliction 
         but in my
                 expectations . . .



The Chinese concubine feeling has left and the   
sky hovers like the preparation of a revolutionary speech. 
You, my long walk with all that expectation   
the sexy lunches, thousands of them, 
and then all that religion of eroticism. 
Beneath the squeeze on my heart is a stranglehold. 
You, like a little Italian porcelain village that’s all over the   
shop window saying admire this image of foreverness.

The red scarf is factory-made but silky 
and it’s what I’d flutter over your face if you were here   
and it would be cheap greasy hypnotism, my own malarkey 
and we’d be on the southside, at the boat docks, and 
I’d kiss you beside the stretch of a Russian grain ship, its   
hammer and sickle like the sending out of rescue choppers.


Then it was the future, though what’s arrived   
isn’t what we had in mind, all chrome and   
cybernetics, when we set up exhibits 
in the cafeteria for the judges 
to review what we’d made of our hypotheses. 

The class skeptic (he later refused to sign   
anyone’s yearbook, calling it a sentimental   
degradation of language) chloroformed mice,   
weighing the bodies before and after 
to catch the weight of the soul, 

wanting to prove the invisible 
real as a bagful of nails. A girl 
who knew it all made cookies from euglena, 
a one-celled compromise between animal and plant,   
she had cultured in a flask. 

We’re smart enough, she concluded, 
to survive our mistakes, showing photos of farmland,   
poisoned, gouged, eroded. No one believed 
he really had built it when a kid no one knew   
showed up with an atom smasher, confirming that 

the tiniest particles could be changed   
into something even harder to break. 
And one whose mother had cancer (hard to admit now,   
it was me) distilled the tar of cigarettes   
to paint it on the backs of shaven mice. 

She wanted to know what it took, 
a little vial of sure malignancy, 
to prove a daily intake smaller 
than a single aspirin could finish 
something as large as a life. I thought of this 

because, today, the dusky seaside sparrow 
became extinct. It may never be as famous 
as the pterodactyl or the dodo, 
but the last one died today, a resident 
of Walt Disney World where now its tissue samples 

lie frozen, in case someday we learn to clone 
one from a few cells. Like those instant dinosaurs 
that come in a gelatin capsule—just add water   
and they inflate. One other thing this 
brings to mind. The euglena girl won first prize 

both for science and, I think, in retrospect, for hope.



One of the spectators is disappointed
there isn’t a guide to explain
the beaching, the scientists busy
cutting into ninety-four pilot whales
stranded on the salt grass.
No one knows why and, try as the rescue team
might, not one whale will go back to water.
So they’re injected to speed up the dying,
 
lined up like lumber and sawed into,
except when the black skin splits
we can’t stop staring, their meat is so red.
I don’t want to know why this happens—
what parasite or geomagnetic anomaly
finished their love of motion. Why should
anything have to leave this world
when water can cycle from atmosphere
down to land, the ocean and back
to forgiving sky.
 
                                      I’m on my way to Connecticut
where my father has a little vegetation
on his heart valve—that’s how the intern
describes it, trying to minimize
the danger of him slipping
into a haze so cold, some nights,
bone-cold, his hand can’t get from
his plate to his mouth.
 
                                                  Rain slicks the highway
slowing me down. The same water
fattened into snow in the woods
of my childhood, the whiteness
unbroken except where my father
cut trails and taught me to ski,
laying down the herringbone behind him
as he broke up hills that left me
with legs made of slush. He wanted me strong,
no patience for pain. No choice
but to find the muscle to follow. Even now
when he boasts how I zigzagged
the breakneck hills in an icestorm,
there’s no hint of my knee-chattering fear,
slats skittering out of control,
each run a victory of luck more than will,
each ride up the lift a prayer for my bones.
I wonder how it is for him now
there in the ward where whiteness can’t hide
the cold blank that’s ahead. When the whales
beached, spectators came like pilgrims,
each new arrival scanning the faces
of those heading back to their cars
to see how it changed them
to survey so much death. Nothing showed.
Their eyes followed the asphalt,
heads bent in private devotion.
 
                                                    There in a room
where others have died, my father
keeps a record of each test and drug.
He watches medicine drip into his arm
and circle in the dark of his blood.
I believe it will heal him, as I believe
in the strength of my blood
to protect me from failures of will. Once
when my grandmother at ninety-six
lay delirious with pneumonia,
pitching on her high horsehair bed,
she saw three crows perched on the dresser.
 
              They smell so awful, she said.
Please, open the window. Let them out.
It was my father who did what she asked.
And the crows flew out, carrying her fever
over the treeline, dissolving into sky,
and she lived. Whatever she saw,
by love, luck or dumb Yankee will,
it was true. That’s what I mean by medicine.



"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps."
If you knock out my teeth, I'll still go down on you, conscientiously,
vine along a trellis, and suck you with my gums. 
If you smash my toes, employing an ice crusher, one by one,
I'll heal myself with such truancy that someday I'll run on my knees.

"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps,"
and orchestrate a standing ovation with the memory of my hands
representing each that are dying, each that are dead,
each forgotten that we refuse to remember like the lost hands of stumps.
So much misery in plain sight like tears streaming down a face;
so much misery hidden like the eventuality of the anti-Christ;
and so much incognito like the accompanying instruments of a torch song:
like the fire in the torch itself, like the torched interior of the song.

If you cut off my ears, I will listen with my eyes
to the spitting death of cavalrymen as they're roasted over an open fire;
to the smallest bones snap, dry as sun-seasoned kindling
of the young and truant witch when she's pressed by a thousand stones;
to the brave convulsions of the communist
strapped in the electric chair, dying by degree...not unlike the commonfolk
plucked from the village, arbitrarily, one last December night,
stripped to the flesh and heaved high into the freezing air
upon a whittled stave, tall and sharp, thrust deep into the asshole
they die by degree, ever so slowly and often only
(if not by freezing first, which, if merciful, God deems)
when the wooden point finally pierces the brain, brain-dead already
from the mauve anticipation and ear-splitting prerequisite of pain.

If you cut out my tongue, I will write you a letter,
a love letter lovelorn for that taste of your tongue.
If you fuck me hard I can never make love again,
I'll plant hyacinth bulbs in an effort to replace my abolished fecundity.
I will turn eternally on my side and pull down my pants
and listen to your masturbate while fantasizing about my ass.
I'll admire the willow out the window when I hear you come
and allow as if in tribute to the times I used to participate,
a vague expression of pleasure, albeit contrived to wash across my face
the way my desire for you, real as a willow, once had done.


This is the light of the mind, cold and planetary.
The trees of the mind are black. Their irregular branches,
like broken arms backlit from MRI dye, offset by yearning.
They take form in ways only experts can decipher.
The light is blue. The observation of the alien doctor
flickers in his iris, furnace gaslight burning like a pagan memorial.

The grasses unload their griefs on my feet as if I were God,
I pity their need for idolatry. It bares itself only to the void of me,
Prickling my ankles and murmuring of their humility.
I am unable to convince them otherwise.
I hear them mew and compete as if for a rough teat's clear nutrition.
Foolish rule of the organic, uncultured and out of control.
I am mum and tidy as a nun in comparison.
Though capable of devastation are my desires which punish
the landscape with recrimination, uprooting the hedges.
They swallow fire, speak in four languages, and love no one.
I shudder with pride as they push themselves back to their origin,
to the scraped-out bottom of a uterine nothing;
this hard loneliness, skull-solid, pushed back into vagueness
until it succumbs as if overwhelmed by barbiturates. 

Fumy, spiritous mists inhabit this place
Separated from my house by a row of headstones.
Its green vapors trigger an olfactory déjà vu like a recurrent nightmare.
I envy the buried faces finally freed from worry and ailment,
from the pressure to remain always forward-thinking.
I picture their release, the prostrate bodies floating up as if levitated.
What peace, what stillness was shoveled onto their pine box beds
where darkness then dropped, all at once, final as an execution.
I simply cannot see where there is to get to.

The moon is no door. It is a face in its own right,
White as a knuckle and terribly upset. I identify with its nausea.
It meets me in the mirror uninvited, this face beneath my face,
restless and unwilling. It formulates inside me like a kicking fetus
and refuses to be ignored. It haunts and threatens like a past trauma.
It drags the sea after it like a dark crime; mute as a mug shot,
it is quiet, like someone suffocated who suddenly stops struggling.
I recognize in its warm death the expression of the starving
With the O-gape of complete despair. I live here.

Against me a force, not stronger or more intelligent,
but more adaptable to poor weather like dandelions.
I can feel it whittle me down to horse feed pellets.
I'm being winnowed out of the earth's circulation,
with a pairing incremental as this winter's passing.
Twice on Sunday the bells startle the sky—
Eight great tongues affirming the Resurrection.
I'm forced to listen to the liturgical lecturing,
truant student of a catechism I loathe.
At the end, they soberly bong out their names;
Myths and ideals I could never bring myself to believe in,
my prayers, the self-flagellation of unrequited love.

The yew tree points up like a New England steeple.
It has a Gothic shape. It used to remind me of home.
The eyes lift after it and find the moon.
Once fragile as rice paper, it hangs static and tough
like a noose signifying more hardship ahead—
interrogating flashlight that hurts my eyes.
Now no home exists—just an empty bed,
a pile of mangled sheets atop a dark wood floor,
like snow atop the frozen mud tracks of hoof and wheel.

The moon is my mother. She is not sweet like Mary.
She licks her white feathers and stares back with one eye
vicious as a swan about to bite.
Her blue garments unloose small bats and owls.
I watch, my leg caught in the truth of my life
where beyond human emotion I've traveled at this point.

How I would like to believe in tenderness—
in those symbolic unions that elicit sweet concepts:
mother and child, father and daughter, husband and wife.
The face of the effigy, gentled by candles,
its cheekbones flushed with an afterworld favoritism
Bending, on me in particular, its mild eyes;
hair waving, mouth parted in mid-speech like drowned Ophelia.

I have fallen a long way. I lie at the bottom, smashed
like a dinner plate against kitchen tile, china chips and jagged bits.
I lie at the bottom, shattered and dangerous, looking up
with a baby's stunned engrossment. I'm moving closer to Pluto and Mars.
Clouds are flowering blue and mystical over the face of the stars,—
It will not be quick. Death drinks me in, slow as syrup.

Inside the church, the saints will be all blue.
They've ascended into heaven's oxygen-deprived morgue.
Floating on their delicate feet over the cold pews,
Their hands and faces stiff with holiness,
mannequins perennially enacting the nativity in a wax museum.
The moon sees nothing of this. She is bald and wild
as one dying of cancer. She begs for relief, but her pillow-muffled
shrieks disperse with the other sounds and shadows of the night.
We are left alone, her cadaver face, gaunt and grim, prescient of mine.
And the message of the yew tree is blackness—blackness and silence.


In the backyard of our house on Norwood, 
there were five hundred steel cages lined up, 
each with a wooden box 
roofed with tar paper; 
inside, two stories, with straw 
for a bed. Sometimes the minks would pace 
back and forth wildly, looking for a way out; 
or else they’d hide in their wooden houses, even when 
we’d put the offering of raw horse meat on their trays, as if 
they knew they were beautiful 
and wanted to deprive us. 
In spring the placid kits 
drank with glazed eyes. 
Sometimes the mothers would go mad 
and snap their necks. 
My uncle would lift the roof like a god 
who might lift our roof, look down on us 
and take us out to safety. 
Sometimes one would escape. 
He would go down on his hands and knees, 
aiming a flashlight like 
a bullet of light, hoping to catch 
the orange gold of its eyes. 
He wore huge boots, gloves 
so thick their little teeth couldn’t bite through. 
“They’re wild,” he’d say. “Never trust them.” 
Each afternoon when I put the scoop of raw meat rich 
with eggs and vitamins on their trays, 
I’d call to each a greeting. 
Their small thin faces would follow as if slightly curious. 
In fall they went out in a van, returning 
sorted, matched, their skins hanging down on huge metal 
hangers, pinned by their mouths. 
My uncle would take them out when company came 
and drape them over his arm—the sweetest cargo. 
He’d blow down the pelts softly 
and the hairs would part for his breath 
and show the shining underlife which, like 
the shining of the soul, gives us each 
character and beauty.



My mother was not impressed with her beauty; 
once a year she put it on like a costume, 
plaited her black hair, slick as cornsilk, down past her hips, 
in one rope-thick braid, turned it, carefully, hand over hand, 
and fixed it at the nape of her neck, stiff and elegant as a crown, 
with tortoise pins, like huge insects, 
some belonging to her dead mother, 
some to my living grandmother. 
Sitting on the stool at the mirror, 
she applied a peachy foundation that seemed to hold her down, to trap her, 
as if we never would have noticed what flew among us unless it was weighted and bound in its mask. 
Vaseline shined her eyebrows, 
mascara blackened her lashes until they swept down like feathers; 
her eyes deepened until they shone from far away. 

Now I remember her hands, her poor hands, which, even then were old from scrubbing, 
whiter on the inside than they should have been, 
and hard, the first joints of her fingers, little fattened pads, 
the nails filed to sharp points like old-fashioned ink pens, 
painted a jolly color. 
Her hands stood next to her face and wanted to be put away, prayed 
for the scrub bucket and brush to make them useful. 
And, as I write, I forget the years I watched her 
pull hairs like a witch from her chin, magnify 
every blotch—as if acid were thrown from the inside. 

But once a year my mother 
rose in her white silk slip, 
not the slave of the house, the woman, 
took the ironed dress from the hanger— 
allowing me to stand on the bed, so that 
my face looked directly into her face, 
and hold the garment away from her 
as she pulled it down.



Sweetheart
when you break thru
you’ll find
a poet here
not quite what one would choose.

I won’t promise
you’ll never go hungry
or that you won’t be sad
on this gutted
breaking 
globe

but I can show you
baby
enough to love
to break your heart
forever



you are my bread
and the hairline 
noise
of my bones
you are almost 
the sea

you are not stone
or molten sound
I think
you have no hands



this kind of bird flies backward
and this love
breaks on a windowpane
where no light talks

this is not time
for crossing tongues
(the sand here
never shifts)



I think 
tomorrow
turned you with his toe
and you will
shine
and shine
unspent and underground


I love to watch them sheathe themselves mid-air, 
shut wings and ride the light’s poor spine 

to earth, to touch down in gutters, in the rainbowed 
urine of suicides, just outside Bellevue’s walls. 

From in there the ransacked cadavers are carried 
up the East River to Potter’s Field 

as if they were an inheritance, 
gleaned of saveable parts, 

their diseases jarred and labeled, or incinerated, 
the ashes of metastisized vision 

professing the virus that lives beyond the flesh 
in air ... 

                
               The first time I saw the inside of anything 
alive, a downed bird opened cleanly 

under my heel. I knelt 
to watch the spectral innards shine and quicken, 

the heart-whir magnify. 
And though I can’t say now what kind of bird it was, 

nor the season, spring or autumn, what 
dangerous transition, 

I have identified so many times that sudden 
earnest spasm of the throat in children, 

or in the jaundiced faces of the dying, 
the lower eye-lids straining upward. 

Fear needs its metaphors. 
I’ve read small helplessnesses make us maternal. 

Even the sparrows feel it, 
nesting this evening in traffic lights. 

They must have remembered, long enough to mate, 
woods they’ve never seen, 

but woods inbred up the long light of instinct, 
the streaked siennas of a forest floor 

born now into the city, 
the oak umbers, and the white tuft 

of tail feathers like a milkweed meadow 
in which their song, as Burroughs heard it, 


could be distinguished: 
come-come-where-where-all-together- 

down-the-hill ...
here, where every history is forfeited, 

where the same names of the different dead greet 
each other and commingle 

above the hospital’s heaps of garbage. 
From the ward windows, fingerprinted, 

from the iron-grated ledges, 
hundreds flock down for the last feed of the day 

and carry off into the charitable dusk what 
cannot be digested.



Inside the starboard window 
of his room in a boat at sea, 
the piece of earth he's scraped from a dead gull’s leg   
sprouts eighty different species, green   
under bell glass. By the sunlight   
of the oil lamp he makes rain   
as the wind picks up toward Chiloe,   
Port Famine, Concepcion, and then Galapagos. 
Here he finds shipwrecked sailors’ epitaphs cut 
into the shell of an old tortoise   
who’s tame enough to ride, 
too huge to slaughter. 
Here the birds are fearless. 
He can catch them with his hands, let them   
perch on his finger before he 
breaks their necks and wraps them 
in his shirt and sets their eggs on branches drifting 
from the shoreline, island to island.   
Now everywhere he meets himself. 
He’s tired, and half the world from home.   
But his mind has entered the morning   
the way all the animals 
kept in his cabin in jars along the wall grow   
smaller in sequence 
until the window opens on the sea,   
so that what he’ll remember 
are the wasted spaces, the desert rock spread out for miles   
as if the earth were flat again,   
dangerous at the horizon, 
where the stones, piled, shine 
against lava black. 
Dew pools in the evenings. 
A few pale leaves appear. 


i.m. India's missing girls
This is not really myth or secret.
This murmur in the mouth 
of the mountain where the sound
of rain is born. This surging
past pilgrim town and village well.
This coin-thin vagina
and acid stain of bone.
This doctor with his rusty tools,
this street cleaner, this mother
laying down the bloody offerings
of birth. This is not the cry
of a beginning, or a river
buried in the bowels of the earth.
This is the sound of ten million girls
singing of a time in the universe
when they were born with tigers
breathing between their thighs;
when they set out for battle
with all three eyes on fire,
their golden breasts held high
like weapons to the sky.


Let us not speak of those days 
when coffee beans filled the morning 
with hope, when our mothers' headscarves 
hung like white flags on washing lines. 
Let us not speak of the long arms of sky 
that used to cradle us at dusk. 
And the baobabs—let us not trace 
the shape of their leaves in our dreams, 
or yearn for the noise of those nameless birds 
that sang and died in the church's eaves. 
Let us not speak of men, 
stolen from their beds at night. 
Let us not say the word
                                            disappeared.
Let us not remember the first smell of rain. 
Instead, let us speak of our lives now—
the gates and bridges and stores.
And when we break bread
in cafés and at kitchen tables
with our new brothers,
let us not burden them with stories
of war or abandonment.
Let us not name our old friends
who are unravelling like fairy tales
in the forests of the dead.
Naming them will not bring them back.
Let us stay here, and wait for the future
to arrive, for grandchildren to speak
in forked tongues about the country
we once came from.
Tell us about it, they might ask.
And you might consider telling them 
of the sky and the coffee beans, 
the small white houses and dusty streets. 
You might set your memory afloat 
like a paper boat down a river. 
You might pray that the paper 
whispers your story to the water, 
that the water sings it to the trees, 
that the trees howl and howl 
it to the leaves. If you keep still 
and do not speak, you might hear 
your whole life fill the world 
until the wind is the only word.



for Judith Radstone
Next to my own skin, her pearls. My mistress 
bids me wear them, warm them, until evening 
when I'll brush her hair. At six, I place them 
round her cool, white throat. All day I think of her,

resting in the Yellow Room, contemplating silk 
or taffeta, which gown tonight? She fans herself 
whilst I work willingly, my slow heat entering 
each pearl. Slack on my neck, her rope.

She's beautiful. I dream about her
in my attic bed; picture her dancing
with tall men, puzzled by my faint, persistent scent
beneath her French perfume, her milky stones.

I dust her shoulders with a rabbit's foot, 
watch the soft blush seep through her skin 
like an indolent sigh. In her looking-glass 
my red lips part as though I want to speak.

Full moon. Her carriage brings her home. I see 
her every movement in my head.... Undressing, 
taking off her jewels, her slim hand reaching 
for the case, slipping naked into bed, the way

she always does.... And I lie here awake, 
knowing the pearls are cooling even now 
in the room where my mistress sleeps. All night 
I feel their absence and I burn.


I won’t quote a word,
but that notable double-crossing chess game
reveals trouble in the desert,
trouble in the lineage, trouble in the choices,
trouble in the allegory.
 
What more to say about the Father of everything
from the inevitable, suspicious, atheist
daughter
watching the claim made around the one—
the beautiful, longed-for, pensive son.
 
They are all male singletons:
one A, one I and one One
(undercounting various brothers
who do not matter in the tally;
 
 
nor enumerating most sisters,
though they certainly existed).
 
Single, except for the One who sent an
androgyne messenger
who rammed the ram into the thicket,
who filled the curly ewe,
who took her mewling newborn sheep.
 
Thereupon the regime of human sacrifice
was declared theologically finished.
But not politically and ideologically finished.
 
Clear enough?


So she stole her father’s teraphim.
What, in the name of monotheism,
was that about?
 
Those rare black stones.
Sacred knick-knacks, idols,
symbolic lion grabbed at that got chipped,
cover them with the ass of female claim,
settle in for the duration, and refuse
(“being in the way of women”)
to rise.
 
Say you are neither disloyal nor pilferer.
And sit tight on the icons and rocks of meaning
gathered from the paternal household,
the talismanic counterfoils, even
the fewest and smallest
from the fierce storehouses of articulation
and defensiveness.
You will remake these goods in your own blood
 
“I didn’t take enough.”
“So go get more.”
Tokens from the broken labyrinth.


even when issues arise and obedience can not be secured by the bludgeon, the bludgeon remains; when we mention the people, we do not mean the confessional body of the people, we mean particularly itinerant bodies in mechanic flux, preaching freedom beyond flesh pamphlets of authority, concealed in blind devotion. when we mean the people, we mean a people knowing their own strength cast as day laborers, or knowing to a greater part of a lesser known part playing paid intercourse in all connections for the people by the people. when we mean, we mean broke or abrasive worn, once open scream representatives, now incarcerated in a rationalistic shadow land, given a history that merges extruder merchandising with wholesale lots of intermittent dung, or objects for understudy beatings.


the day shifts, we talk to each other the way we talk to each other, the luster fades, our bodies fill with sap, there is a shift, joy reappears before another personal narrative burns to a heap of citations, continuing in complicated machinery, becoming blood knots in space, both the living and dead surround the present has been. I open my eyes in the full force of fear and hesitation, frozen in passing passageways with endless permutations, subjected to violence, stupidity, and love.


It’s possible I misconstrued you,
 
laid too much emphasis on the uniqueness of a birth, 
failed to acknowledge circumstance could corrupt, sustain;
I indulged myself in accusations against an absolute.
 
I don’t believe what I then believed. You are not responsible
 
for Leibniz or the Lisbon quake, for the twenty-six-eyed
and sixty-arsed box jellyfish, that the cosmos
is shaped like a soccer ball; or for the dosido
of right and wrong around the garden bed.
 
You are not the monster I thought you were,
 
not by definition or necessity the one immutable.
You are a creator caught in a creator’s net, in fact
a creature. Every horror has its own pathology, 
 
the disease infects the flock. Prey present as predators,  
the malefactors replicate even as the angels 
experiment with cures. Each encounter pulls against reductive story,
says I will not, I am just (an instant, an instance),
 
and reference skews on maps not drawn to scale.
 
I know saintliness exists. It’s all around me.
My next door neighbours in their simple modesty,
the lady down the street who is always
helping someone older than herself. Even the slow
judicial process conceives it natural to be better 
than we are. I’m trying to shoo the gloomy birds away 
 
but crows repeat about me on the lawn; and the vulture
and the kite, the cuckoo and the owl: should I have given up the ghost 
when I was drawn from the womb?


I can’t get my head around it. How did we devise
 
a concept like just war: the slain of the Lord
are dung upon the ground. I know there are distinctions
it is important to make and I don’t expect perfection
but the chicanery of subtle thought . . . if I pick it all apart
will anything be left to sew back into sense?
 
Cleverer minds are reconciled. Cultured, poised,
the government official (Should I give him spectacles?
Should they reflect the light?) pauses and replies:
The President regrets . . . but consider the alternative …
 
would you offer succour… and I can almost understand.
 
I sleep with reason as my lover, wake beside a monster
in my bed. I fumble beneath the mask, shape my lips
to the prospect of a kill, feel your thigh
against my rump, your fingers at my throat.
 
Oh, Rakosi, I’m still strumming on my lyre. Is there really
so much wrong with that? I’m embarrassed
 
by the flimsiness of my resolve, the silliness of saints and monsters,
conversations with a being who can’t plausibly exist,
this mockery of flagellation: this is my defective heart, 
this my amputated foot, this the bandage from around my head.
A monster dies in the middle of his trial, another
denies the power of the court, two more evade arrest:
in politic’s parlour game, each day annuls the last.
 
9/11, I say, and Afghanistan, Bali and Iraq, 
but I can’t fix a year to each event, what is, 
what well might be, are steam against a bathroom mirror: 
I see bits, an eye but not its double, the other ear,
 
a chin that lacks a jawbone for support.


There are two memories of tides:
one for the deep blackness that split
away from the mother sea
and one for sea that found itself
in the daybreaks of rivers.
Yet it was all one sea
tracked by comets and the Elegant Tern,
seals in speckled pod-shaped skins,
and whales, opening their small eyes
when the hands of people drew fish
out of the salt.

Geologists tell us that the sea split
millions of years ago
before the Yoemem, Yoremem,
Kunkaak, O-Otam
curled their tongues around the names
of themselves and raised the conch shell 
to their lips, so that the sound of nature
became human, too:

kalifornia vaawe

Then the sea was measured
and divided into leagues.
The Spanish ships called it dangerous
because the sea tore in two ways,
tide and rivers,
so they contained it in maps
written on dead animal skins
with ink made from dried octopus blood

Mar de la Kalifornia
Golfo de California

Then it was named the Vermilion Sea
when the red-shelled crabs clicked in the waters.
It was the Sea of Cortés
because it’s the right of the Conqueror
to claim the world in his name.

It’s his right to name hunger after himself
and to take away rivers
and children
and to give back the bare bones
of life
in the Queen’s name.

What can you say about men
who name the mountains “mother”
madre
when the worst curse they can shout
defiles their mother
in the act of creation?

Now we call the Gulf of California
polluted
with the pesticides of fields
and the wastes of factories.
And the voices of the fin-backed whale,
sardines, sea-kelp, anemone,
and turtle are quieter,
so that we have less memory
of the way it was
and less hope
for the way it will be.

In the winter I eat strawberries
from Mexico
and oranges, sectioned and split
apart
on my north continental plate.
I don’t know much about my relatives
picking the fields near Bacum, Torim.
I don’t know much about the spiny sea urchin,
except that it knows more than I
about the sea, the sea that names itself
unnameable
movable horizon.


Mining: The Indian is naked, swinging
quarter to half hundredweight steel-edged crowbars.
He climbs beams with notches set step by step,
carrying ore in plaited baskets
on his shoulders.
They are given one half-bushel of maize per week.
This is their payment unless they have a family–
then they are given two half-bushels.

Two men using a wheelbarrow could haul out 
more than can thirty lazy Indians
working an entire day.

Natural resources: They are naked, with only a loincloth.
Otherwise they would steal valuable ore.
Instead they laugh
when their hair is thick with dusted gold
so that they look like ugly yellow-haired creatures.
Their hair is long and they secrete fragments
of ore there, wrapping their hair up
like a turban. You can no more trust them
than you would a Turk.

Gold and silver ore varies.
Some is very heavy, pure
silver spiked, as it were, 
with silver nails.
The completely black
very heavy ores
are considered the richest.

Processing: The Indian washes his hair
several times a day, sluicing water
over his long hair, letting the silver fall
into a bowl which he then strains,
keeping more silver.
Then again, the Indian must relieve himself
and he hides behind a bush,
thereby stealing more ore
in a most despicable way.

Some can be reduced by fire . . . 
or be broken up
and placed into a clay oven
. . . with molten lead,
until . . . the lead has amalgamated 
with the silver.
Pebbles and slag float on top
and are skinned off
with hoes and the lead heated
with a double fire
until it becomes light and frothy
like glass.
This froth is removed in heaps;
what remains is pure silver.

The waste product: When the Indian dies,
perhaps careless at work, he is wrapped in a horse blanket.
Thread from deer or plant fiber
is used to sew him up.
It is heathen, this practice
of putting bows and arrows,
small bowls, and other things
in the grave. Instead, I pull the bell rope
and they are pleased at the songs
and lighted tapers
on the altar of the whitewashed church.
They die when they want to,
saying they are only journeying
to the next village.

They have many vices
which I have discovered
and abolished, including the throwing 
of patterned sticks,
which is like gambling.
They would rather lie on blankets
in the bushes, throwing these sticks
against the rough wool to muffle the sound,
than work in the fields
or in the mines which are very near,
nor do they think of tomorrow
and the profit that must be made,
whether it is gold, silver, maize,
or their heathenish souls.


Late summer, late afternoon, my work
interrupted by bees who claim my tea,
even my pen looks flower-good to them.
I warn a delivery man that my bees, 
who all summer have been tame as cows,
now grow frantic, aggressive, difficult to shoo
from the house. I blame the second blooms
come out in hot colors, defiant vibrancy—
unexpected from cottage cosmos, nicotianna,
and bean vine. But those bees know, I’m told
by the interested delivery man, they have only 
so many days to go. He sighs at sweetness untasted.

Still warm in the day, we inspect the bees.
This kind stranger knows them in intimate detail.
He can name the ones I think of as shopping ladies.
Their fur coats ruffed up, yellow packages tucked
beneath their wings, so weighted with their finds
they ascend in slow circles, sometimes drop, while
other bees whirl madly, dance the blossoms, ravish
broadly so the whole bed bends and bounces alive.

He asks if I have kids, I say not yet. He has five,
all boys. He calls the honeybees his girls although
he tells me they’re ungendered workers 
who never produce offspring. Some hour drops,
the bees shut off. In the long, cool slant of sun,
spent flowers fold into cups. He asks me if I’ve ever
seen a Solitary Bee where it sleeps. I say I’ve not.
The nearest bud’s a long-throated peach hollyhock.
He cradles it in his palm, holds it up so I spy
the intimacy of the sleeping bee. Little life safe in a petal,
little girl, your few furious buzzings as you stir
stay with me all winter, remind me of my work undone.


Dumped wet and momentary on a dull ground
that’s been clear but clearly sleeping, for days.
Last snow melts as it falls, piles up slush, runs in first light
making a music in the streets we wish we could keep.
Last snow. That’s what we’ll think for weeks to come.
Close sun sets up a glare that smarts like a good cry.
We could head north and north and never let this season go.
Stubborn beast, the body reads the past in the change of light,
knows the blow of grief in the time of trees’ tight-fisted leaves.
Stubborn calendar of bone. Last snow. Now it must always be so.


Ray’s third new car in half as many years. 
Full cooler in the trunk, Ray sogging the beer 
as I solemnly chauffeur us through the bush 
and up the backroads, hardly cowpaths and hub-deep in mud.   
All day the sky lowers, clears, lowers again. 
Somewhere in the bush near Saint John 
there are uncles, a family, one mysterious brother 
who stayed on the land when Ray left for the cities. 
One week Ray is crocked. We’ve been through this before.   
Even, as a little girl, hands in my dress, 
Ah punka, you’s my Debby, come and ki me. 


Then the road ends in a yard full of dogs. 
Them’s Indian dogs, Ray says, lookit how they know me.   
And they do seem to know him, like I do. His odor— 
rank beef of fierce turtle pulled dripping from Metagoshe,   
and the inflammable mansmell: hair tonic, ashes, alcohol.   
Ray dances an old woman up in his arms. 
Fiddles reel in the phonograph and I sink apart 
in a corner, start knocking the Blue Ribbons down.   
Four generations of people live here. 
No one remembers Raymond Twobears. 

So what. The walls shiver, the old house caulked with mud   
sails back into the middle of Metagoshe. 
A three-foot-long snapper is hooked on a fishline,   
so mean that we do not dare wrestle him in 
but tow him to shore, heavy as an old engine. 
Then somehow Ray pries the beak open and shoves   
down a cherry bomb. Lights the string tongue. 

Headless and clenched in its armor, the snapper 
is lugged home in the trunk for tomorrow’s soup. 
Ray rolls it beneath a bush in the backyard and goes in   
to sleep his own head off. Tomorrow I find 
that the animal has dragged itself off. 
I follow torn tracks up a slight hill and over 
into a small stream that deepens and widens into a marsh. 

Ray finds his way back through the room into his arms.   
When the phonograph stops, he slumps hard in his hands   
and the boys and their old man fold him into the car 
where he curls around his bad heart, hearing how it knocks   
and rattles at the bars of his ribs to break out. 

Somehow we find our way back. Uncle Ray   
sings an old song to the body that pulls him 
toward home. The gray fins that his hands have become   
screw their bones in the dashboard. His face   
has the odd, calm patience of a child who has always 
let bad wounds alone, or a creature that has lived   
for a long time underwater. And the angels come   
lowering their slings and litters.


I woke. A tiny knot of skin on a silver table
Set in the birth-theater, blinking in the glare
Of electric lights and a strange arranged
 
Passel of faces: huge as gods in their council.
I was the actor who forgets his lines and enters
On stage suddenly wanting to say, I am.
 
I was almost all eye: they weighed me down,
Two lump-big brown-sugar bags in a face
Which did not yet know struggle, burden;
 
How the look of newborns unnerves. Then
They wrapped me in pale yellow like a new sun
Still too small to throw up into the sky.
 
 
              It was midnight when they injected me
With a plague; tamed, faded as imperialism, pox
Had once put its palm-leaf hand over a quarter of Earth
 
Saying, these. Now it was contracted to a drop:
And in the morning I knew both death and life.
Lapped in my nimbus of old gold light, my 
 
Huge lashes drooped over my deepened eyes, like
Ostrich-feather shades over twin crown princes: wet heads
Sleek and doomed as the black soul of an open poppy.


I rise like a red balloon, untethered and vacant.
 
The essence of my dolor has become rarefied,
Holy; like a fragrance, bodiless, without referent.
It is pale shadow on the sun, a wasp’s-wing, accidental
Splash of poison on the white rose’s thorn—
I twist it in my fingers and faint. Shall I tell you?
 
There was one bad fairy at my birth, there came one curse,
One blister, one drop of mercury in the moult of me
And everything was ruined after.
 
                                                       Still it is
No good; the words drift from me like ashes.
I am so old now, I have left half my life
In caves hollowed out in rock by the seashore:
I prayed in each one, and could not find my way back,
Or lied when the pass-word was asked, or turned my back,
Making gestures of despondency at the roiling surf.
 
                  In a mirror I shot all my hateful selves, the yesterdays.


My mind hovered over my baby, like 
a raptor, and froze everything it saw. 
I looked through my own pregnant belly's raw 
perimeters and found his heart to strike 
attentive until, helpless with the pound 
of still more blood, he seemed to settle down. 
It was my loss to feel like god alone 
for a new one always listening, to reach 
inside for his ears to share the flying speech 
I heard so constantly. Within my grown 
silence, my sounding, my loud body where 
the baby turned, my mind learned not to care 
whether thoughts I felt he noticed with no fear 
were mine alone—or whether he could hear.



She turned to gold and fell in love. 
She danced life upside down. 

She opened her wild eyes again 
and asked some strangers in. 

The strangers felt her in and out. 
They found her outsides thin. 

Since her heart was still and hard, 
they knocked her insides in. 



 I stop my hand midair.
 
               If I touch her there everything about me will be true.
               The New World discovered without pick or ax.
 
               I will be what Brenda Jones was stoned for in 1969.
               I saw it as a girl but didn’t know I was taking in myself.
 
               My hand remembers, treading the watery room,
               just behind the rose-veiled eyes of memory.
 
Alone in the yard tucked beneath the hood of her car,
lucky clover all about her feet, green tea-sweet necklace
for her mud-pie crusty work boots.
 
She fends off their spit & words with silent two-handed
twists & turns of her socket wrench. A hurl of sticks &
stones and only me to whisper for her, from sidewalk far,
 
break my bones. A grown woman in grease-pocket overalls
inside her own sexy transmission despite the crowding of
hurled red hots. Beneath the hood of her candy-apple Camaro:
 
souped, shiny, low to the ground.
 
               The stars over the Atlantic are dangling
               salt crystals. The room at the Seashell Inn is
               $20 a night; special winter off-season rate.
               No one else here but us and the night clerk,
               five floors below, alone with his cherished
               stack of Spiderman. My lips are red snails
               in a primal search for every constellation
               hiding in the sky of your body. My hand
               waits for permission, for my life to agree
               to be changed, forever. Can Captain Night
               Clerk hear my fingers tambourining you
               there on the moon? Won’t he soon climb
               the stairs and bam! on the hood of this car?
               You are a woman with film reels for eyes.
               Years of long talking have brought us to the
               land of the body. Our skin is one endless
               prayer bead of brown. If my hand ever lands,
               I will fly past dreaming Australian Aborigines.
               The old claw hammer and monkey wrench
               that flew at Brenda Jones will fly across the
               yard of ocean at me. A grease rag will be
               thrust into my painter’s pants against my
               will. I will never be able to wash or peel
               any of this away. Before the night is over
               someone I do not know will want the keys
               to my ’55 silver Thunderbird. He will chase
               me down the street. A gaggle of spooked
               hens will fly up in my grandmother’s yard,
               never to lay another egg, just as I am jump-
               ed, kneed, pulled finally to the high ground
               of sweet clover.


We were a Colored Clan of Kinfolk 
Who threw soil      not salt 
Over our shoulders 
Who tendered close the bible 
Who grew and passed around the almanac at night 
So we would know   
What to plant at first light 

Black soil and sweet brown sorghum 
From the every morning biscuits 
Mama Susan fixed 
Dripping and mixing 
Up under our fingernails 
A secret salve 
Just like any other 
Living simple 
And keeping to our proud selves 
Quite aware of night riders 
Quite aware of men with   
Politicious smiles 
Cologned with kerosene and match 

Aware of just whose feet 
Walked across our tin roofs at night 

We were such light sleepers 
Such long distance believers 

We were a family pregnant 
Whose water had broke 
And for once there was ham money 
’Bacca money 
So we thought to do better by ourselves 
To begin our next row 
We would go and get him 
Because he was medically degreed in baby bringing 
Because he was young and white and handsome 
And because of that 
Had been neighbor to more knowledge 
Than us way back behind   
The country’s proud but inferior lines 

And because he came with his papers in his pocket 
So convincing      so soon 
After his ivy graduation 
Asking us hadn’t we heard 
Telling us times had changed 
And the midwife wasn’t safe anymore 
Even though we had all been caught 
By tried and true Black Grannies 
Who lay ax blade sharp side up 
And water pan underneath the bed 
To cut the pain 
To cool the fever 

We were a Pregnant Clan of Kinfolk 
Caught with water running down our legs 
Old family say they remember   
Going to fetch him 
Telling him that it was time 
That he should come now 
But he didn’t show right away 
Not right away 
But came when he wanted 
The next day 
After his breakfast 

But what more 
Could we colored country folk ever want 
Even if we had to watch the road all night for him 
Even if we had to not let her push too hard 
When he finally came 
He had his papers on him 
Something with one of those pretty shiny seals 
Old family say they can remember 
Somethin’ just wasn’t right 
But we opened the screen for him anyway 
Trusting 
And tendering close what the Good Book 
Had told us all our lives to do 

Then we made him a path 
Where he put his hand up      then inside 
My grandmother’s womb 
Her precious private pleasing place 
Somewhere he probably didn’t want to touch 

Then he pulled my daddy through 
Somebody he probably didn’t care to reach for 
And from the first he pulled him wrong 
And wrong 
Shattered his collarbone 
And snapped his soft baby foot in half 
And smashed the cartilage in his infant hand 

Wringing 
Their own sun baked arms 
Old timey family 
Remember him well 
Say they knew somethin’ wasn’t right 
As he came through the door 
A day later 
His breakfast digested now 
Somethin’ just wasn’t right 
How he had two waters on him 
One sweet      one sour-mash 
One trying to throw snow quilt over the other 
As he un-carefully 
As drunkenly 
He with his papers on him still 
Stood there turning a brown baby into blue 
Un-magically 
And right before our eyes 

Hope and Pray 
Hope and Pray 

Then he packed his bag and      left 
With all of his official training 
And gathered up gold stars      left 
The Virginia land of Cumberland County 

He left and forgot 
He left and didn’t remember 
The afterbirth inside 
Carlene Godwin Finney 

To clabber 
Gangrene 
Close down 
Her place 
Her precious private pleasing place 
To fill the house to the rafters 
Up past the dimpled tin roof 
With a rotting smell 
That stayed for nine days 
That mortgaged a room 
In our memories 
And did not die with her 

We were a Brown and Pregnant Family 
And he would’ve remembered his schoolin’ 
And left his bottle 
Recollected his manners 
And brought his right mind 
Had another klan called him to their bedside 
He would’ve come right away 
He would’ve never had liquor on his breath 
If the color of my daddy’s broken limbs 
Had matched the color of his own but 

We were a Colored Clan of Kinfolk 
We should’ve met him at the door 
Should’ve told him lean first into the rusty screen 
Made him open up his mouth and blow 
Breathe out right there 
Into all of our brown and lined up faces 
In wait of his worthiness 

Then just for good measure 
Should’ve made him blow once again 
Into Papa Josh’s truth telling jar 
Just to be sure 
Should’ve let Mama Sally 
Then Aunt Nanny 
Then lastly Aunt Mary   
Give him the final once over 
And hold his sterile hands 
Down to the firelight to check 
Just like she checked our own every night 
Before supper 
Before we were allowed to sit 
At her very particular table 

We could’ve let Aunt Ira clutch him by his chin 
Enter and leave through her eyes 
Just like how she came and went through us   
Everyday at her leisure 

She would’ve took care to notice 
As she traveled all up and through him 
Any shaking      any sweating 
And caught his incapable belligerent incompetence 
In time 

Oh Jesus 

We should’ve let Grandpop Robert 
Have him from the first 
Should’ve let him pick him up 
By the back of his pants 
And swirl him around 
Just like he picked us up 
And swirled us around 
Anytime he caught us lying or lazy 
Or being less than what we were 

We should’ve let Grandpop 
Loose on him from the start 
And he would’ve held him up 
High eye to the sun 
And looked straight through him 
Just like he held us up 
And then we would have known first 
Like he always knew first 
And brought to us 
The very map of his heart 
Then we would have known 
Just what his intentions were 
With our Carlene 

Before we knew his name 
Or cared about his many degrees 
Before he dared reach up      then inside 
Our family’s brown globe 
While we stood there 
Some of us throwing good black soil 
With one hand 
Some of us tending close 
The Good Book with the other 
Believing and trusting 
We were doing better 
By this one 
Standing there 

Waterfalls running 
Screaming whitewater rapids 

Down our pants legs 
Down our pantaloons 
To our many selves 

All the while   
Praying hard 
That maybe we were wrong 
(please make us wrong) 
One hundred proof 
Smelled the same as 
Isopropyl


Light the first of eight tonight— 
the farthest candle to the right. 

Light the first and second, too, 
when tomorrow's day is through. 

Then light three, and then light four— 
every dusk one candle more 

Till all eight burn bright and high, 
honoring a day gone by 

When the Temple was restored, 
rescued from the Syrian lord, 

And an eight-day feast proclaimed— 
The Festival of Lights—well named 

To celebrate the joyous day 
when we regained the right to pray 
to our one God in our own way.


You can’t have nothing clean. 
I scrubbed like a crazy woman 
at Isom’s clothes that first week 
and here they come off the line, little black 
stripes wherever I’d pinned them up 
or hung them over—coal dust settles 
on the clothesline, piles up 
like a line of snow on a tree branch. 
After that, I wiped down the clothesline 
every time, but no matter, you can’t 
get it all off. His coveralls is stripy 
with black and gray lines, 
ankles of his pants is ringed around,
like marks left by shackles. 
I thought I’d die that first week 
when I seen him walk off to the mine, 
black, burnt-looking marks 
on his shirt over his shoulders, right 
where wings would of folded.


and hue 

to have unheld a scale— 

silver dishes little mirrors on their chains— 

they go that way, This 

         and hoist 

It’s not like looking into a pool, 
to let your intelligence run away with you 

Come back quarter size, apricot moon 

A changeling is a child who 
appeared under cover 
of the ordinary, in exchange 

The morning came 
                  I have such pretty handwriting 
                  no one said but I myself thought it 
                  to myself so I matted it 
                  like the grasses or a canvas or some 
                  uncombed hair. It became a mess 
                  which was the research of where things go. 

A child could figure it out 

if there is such a thing as “out” 

in the sense of being figured 
               in 

the thinking was like Origami, 
everyone folded out of birds, into specific 

kinds of birds 
         I call you       
                            hickory 

                            category 

                            dot


I 

Near Lion, 

       Bliss mimes. 

Shy.  Fish hat, two bandaids. 

       pith : flee 

cat light 

fat cloak 



                                       Dear Orion,   

                                              This rhymes. 

                                       I.  Wish that, you had stayed. 

                                              with : me 

                                       that night 

                                       that broke 



      2 

Hear Why an 

    oar slides 

off the boat. 

See thin 

blue chance 

hum there a fourth 

in rows. 



                                       Dear Orion 

                                           More rhymes. 

                                       Cough.  A throat. 

                                       Begin 

                                       to dance 

                                       somewhere the north 

                                       wind blows. 



      3 

Clear My One 

    clogged throat. 

Reverse rhyme. 

Switch surface, 

depth.  Carry across 

the two 

of me, from 

you, or 

you. 

                                       Dear Orion 

                                           Bog, moat. 

                                       Peverse sign. 

                                       Hitch surfeit, 

                                       step. Wary of dross 

                                       a new 

                                       love she, some 

                                       clue. For, 

                                       to. 



       I 

Steer Me 

       Bliss chimes. 

Why, dish-flat 

too bad, frayed. 

       Flint sea. 

Sad height 

at float 

                                       Dear She 

                                              This rhymes. 

                                       I, wish-that 

                                       you had, stayed. 

                                              With me. 

                                       That night 

                                       that broke



Early December, dusk, and the sky 
slips down the rungs of its blue ladder 
into indigo. A late-quarter moon hangs 
in the air above the ridge like a broken plate 
and shines on us all, on the new deputy 
almost asleep in his four-by-four, 
lulled by the crackling song of the dispatcher, 
on the bartender, slowly wiping a glass 
and racking it, one eye checking the game. 
It shines down on the fox’s red and grey life, 
as he stills, a shadow beside someone’s gate, 
listening to winter. Its pale gaze caresses 
the lovers, curled together under a quilt, 
dreaming alone, and shines on the scattered 
ashes of terrible fires, on the owl’s black flight, 
on the whelks, on the murmuring kelp, 
on the whale that washed up six weeks ago 
at the base of the dunes, and it shines 
on the backhoe that buried her.


How valuable it is in these short days, 
threading through empty maple branches, 
the lacy-needled sugar pines.
 
Its glint off sheets of ice tells the story 
of Death’s brightness, her bitter cold.
 
We can make do with so little, just the hint 
of warmth, the slanted light.
 
The way we stand there, soaking in it, 
mittened fingers reaching.
 
And how carefully we gather what we can 
to offer later, in darkness, one body to another.



Swallows carve lake wind, 
trailers lined up, fish tins. 
The fires of a thousand small camps   
spilled on a hillside. 

I pull leeks, morels from the soil, 
fry chubs from the lake in moonlight.   
I hear someone, hear the splash, groan   
of a waterpump, wipe my mouth.   
Fish grease spits at darkness. 

Once I nudged a canoe through that water,   
letting its paddle lift, drip. 
I was sucked down smaller than the sound   
of the dropping, looked out 
from where I had vanished.



In the morning of the tribe this name Ancapagari was given to these mountains. The name, then alive, spread into the world and never returned. Ancapagari: no foot-step ever spoken, no mule deer killed from its foothold, left for dead. Ancapagari opened the stones. Pine roots gripped peak rock with their claws. Water dug into the earth and vanished, boiling up again in another place. The water was bitten by aspen, generations of aspen shot their light colored trunks into space. Ancapagari. At that time, if the whisper was in your mouth, you were lighted. 

Now these people are buried. The root-taking, finished. Buried in everything, thousands taken root. The roots swell, nesting. Openings widen for the roots to surface. 

They sway within you in steady wind of your breath. You are forever swinging between this being and another, one being and another. There is a word for it crawling in your mouth each night. Speak it. 

Ancapagari has circled, returned to these highlands. The yellow pines deathless, the sparrow hawks scull, the waters are going numb. Ancapagari longs to be spoken in each tongue. It is the name of the god who has come from among us.


You were never a man 
in the television sense of the word. 

I was never a wild Slinky 
in the sex-club sense of a toy. 

You were never a tobacco store 
in the Modernist sense of a trope. 

I was never a snowdrop 
in the candy store sense of a treat. 

You were never Day-glo 
in the fashionista sense of a scarf. 

I was never withyouallthetime
in the username sense of a self. 

You were never a strumpet 
in the toothache sense of an insult. 

I was never a tooting horn 
in the childhood sense of a game. 

You were never a hole-in-my-heart   
in the country singer sense of a vista. 

I was never a paper doll 
in the pyromaniac sense of a pal. 

You were never a parenthesis 
in the phony secret sense of a sign. 

I was never red lipstick 
in the pulp novel sense of a threat. 

You were never a word 
in the mystic sense of an obstacle. 

I was never a shaking castanet   
in the midnight sense of a song.



The eyes on a face have brought me sadness: 
the right eye searching for seams in ripped fishnets; 
the left eye lost and wandering the dark; the eye 
of the baby god crawling behind a couch in the moist 
suburb where we planned our escape from video games 
and grilled cheese; the eye of a whale we met in a dream 
who spit us out so we could make the 8 o’clock screening 
of On Golden Pond; the eye of the clock, blinking
when the oboe wailed like a burning shofar; the eye
inside the eye, curled up—a sprouting lima bean, 
remembering the nineteenth century, those rosy drapes;
the eyes of missing finger tips, of sad afternoons 
in French cafés in Dayton, Ohio; the eyes on the very 
real parrot who sits on the shoulders of a wax actor
dressed as a pirate; the eyes of an actress, pretending 
to be my mom; the eyes of my father, sleeping on a train, 
dreaming about miniature crashing planes; the eyes 
of a swimming pool, looking up or down everyone’s
swimsuits and into their souls; the eyes in love 
songs written by mean men; the eyes in the painting 
lost in a fire where we tried to save the ancient cat;
the eyes underneath tap shoes clicking like teeth; 
the eyes of Fred Astaire, never blinking, even to kiss
in the dark; the eyes of the state of Texas secretly
tattooed on everyone’s ass, and the eyes on the billboard, 
ripped and faded from rain like the eyes of the best waitress
on the Upper West Side who knows everyone’s order, 
even those of customers she’s never met. 
Can you hear  the eyes under my eyes? 
They steal other people’s dreams to use them for ad copy. 
Here are the eyes of a man who’d be my husband if he
hadn’t married my twin, and there are the eyes of the judge 
who divorced them, blue as his tie. I forget the eye color 
of the first man I loved—what color was my hat when we cried
in the snow? The whites of everyone’s eyes swirl together
in silent music. Nothing like the closed eyes of a flamenco dancer, 
eating a dripping hamburger by the highway. Instead it is 
the right eye of a teacher when she touches her student; 
the eyes inside my mouth and the eyes outside your mouth;
the eyes of the writer and reader, a broken vase and a whole petal; 
the eyes on what you thought of as a cunt and the eyes 
on what I thought of as a cock; the small eyes on the open book 
and the bigger eyes of the closed book; the eyes I swallow 
when we talk, and the eyes that fly above us in sleep.


He asked me       if I had a choice
what kind of bird
would I choose to be. 
I know what he thought I’d say
since he tried to        end
my sentences half the time
anyway. Something exotic
he thought. He thought
maybe macaw.
That would fit
all loudmouthed 
and primary colored 
he would think.
(He thinks too much
I always thought.)
But really       at heart
I’m more
don’t laugh now
     an L B J
          little brown job
except               except
I’m not the 
flit        from
branch
to        branch        type
such a waste
of energy all that
wing flap
and scritch scritch scratch.
Really now
can you see me
seed pod clamped
between my beak
like some landowner,
Havana cigar
clenched
between his teeth?
No         I think         not
I think
green heron.
You ask why?
Personality
mainly.
That hunched look
wings tucked to neck
waiting        waiting
in the sun
on a wide slab of rock
alongside a slow river
like some old man
up from a bad night’s dream
where he’s seen his coffin
and you say to him
Have a nice day
and he says        Make me.
Oh          you want looks
I’ll give you
looks:
long olive green feathers
a trace of 
iridescence
I could stand
going out       iridescent
chestnut sides and head
a black crown
yes        a crown
something regal
to flash when you get
too close
dark bill         bright
yellow legs
and that creamy streak
down my throat and pecs
good
        not great
but good         pecs
just enough for a quick
hop to the next.
The best part
no sexual dimorphism
male         female
both alike 
endless possibilities.


Dusk to dawn, sleek skunks enjoy
avocados in my yard. I give wide berth.
Before the first jogger leaves her prints
on pavement, tough raccoons appear.
They pretend they don’t hear my keys click
but they peek to make sure it’s me.
Foxes play hide-and-seek,
sometimes on our lawn, other times
across the street, but never after seven;
and brazen squirrels eye me
from the center of the street,
dare me to approach.

Will this be a day for Catalina eddies,
clouds stacked, catching like magnets
in a liquid air swirl?
Or will it blow a fierce Santa Ana,
days of fires in the hills,
smoldering chaparral,
winds so fierce birds do low-crawls?
I cast a spell for Santa Anas
the shallow coast a censer
mixed with black sage, Torrey Pine,
Engelmann oak—precious oils
to fumigate the San Diego skies,
the annual burning pulse.



Wasn't that your cheek against mine last night
Gin Streetlight When somebody loves you Impossible

When you reach the broken paddock fence 
the sign will say Impossible

The color God painted my eyes A cross 
between storm and ewerstream Impossible

All your wrong lovers without certificates 
Stamped across their foreheads Impossible

Dear Torch Received your kind invitation 
Regret conflagration impossible

You must mean a phantom Your hand at her waist 
Your ache at her absence Not mine Impossible

A holy place in the emperor's city 
A peach in a stone Impossible

You the mask of a ram I the mask of a bull 
Horn chips Mischling Torn doors Impossible

Dance without footprints Dance with no name 
in a room with no lovers not touching Impossible

Your eyes One protecting your sleeping son's dreaming 
One torchlit and trying to close Impossible

Dear Lion Here's a gazelle Hold her
in your teeth but no biting Yours Impossible


I'm used to the emperor's bitterness
I can't find the sweet place unless you make me

This face that is not my face I may
look made but when you touch me you make me

Make the oak say blossom The stripped say swell 
The avenue pavement say river Make me

This shirt I can't take off The one
the nights without you gathered to make me

The new day The sweet place Tomorrow 
whispering from tonight's last light Make me

Kissing you without authorization
If you want me to stop you'll have to make me

The ruined city Or is it a woman
interrupting your sleep to say Now To say Make me


Gardens are also good places 
to sulk. You pass beds of 
spiky voodoo lilies   
and trip over the roots   
of a sweet gum tree,   
in search of medieval   
plants whose leaves,   
when they drop off   
turn into birds 
if they fall on land, 
and colored carp if they   
plop into water. 

Suddenly the archetypal   
human desire for peace   
with every other species   
wells up in you. The lion   
and the lamb cuddling up. 
The snake and the snail, kissing. 
Even the prick of the thistle,   
queen of the weeds, revives   
your secret belief 
in perpetual spring, 
your faith that for every hurt   
there is a leaf to cure it.


A million years ago the earth grew cold. Iowa was covered by twenty-five hundred feet of ice. No one knows why the glaciers formed and spread, or why they eventually retreated. 

I blinked and you were gone. 

As a boy, he loved the idea of the ice age. Lumbering woolly mammoths and giant sloths. Outside, a vast white edict erasing the landscape. Inside his head, cave paintings of bison leapt in the firelight, their horns spiraling upward, the tips smoking. 

Men on skis came to dig you out. Though they worked all night, they were too late. 

Waking every day the frost reasserts itself. Its relentlessness a tedium, a closure. The earth must have looked more familiar when all was water. We don’t recognize ourselves amidst this overwhelming winter: static that censors newscasts, cold that burns, incessant dripping as icicles perfect themselves. The night skies are a riot of Chinese silk: bolts of crimson and shadow-blue. The radio crackles faintly. 

Medical refuse litters the beaches, spews into the water from a backed up sewer under the pier. Bacteria cavort in the seawater. The weather’s gone haywire all over the globe. The more sensitive you are the earlier you’ll die. Just hold your breath a little longer, dear. 

Once you start this medication, you can’t stop. Your life changes. You decide, based on a dearth of information, which force you want to submit to: nature, now less maternal than ever, or her idiot son—modern medicine.

You make an effort to find some grand design in this blindness. If you can’t see well enough anymore to edit your film, perhaps you can still do the music. You set an example. 

Lemme outa here. 

As a boy, before his mother found out and made him stop, he’d bury the frozen birds he found on the porch after big storms by warming the earth first with his father’s blowtorch. 

Being human, we can’t help attempting to arrange events into patterns—the way a sick man sees faces in the stains on his bedroom ceiling. He names them. Months later, they all converse. 

The men in the ice-covered radio station play cards and drink bourbon. 

What defense can one mount against an avalanche? 

Spotless beakers, pipettes, rows of small cages. Welcome to the lab. Here’s the chamber where we run preliminary screenings. Better don these gloves. Why not use two pair, like me? The new man on the night shift nods off over his work, with the radio playing. Its tinny strands of music enter his dream disguised as a dead friend’s hair. He had short coarse hair, like a terrier’s, pleasantly stiff to the touch. The lab is brightly lit to ward off the backwash of night. Under the table the research assistant’s feet twitch spasmodically in his sleep. 

A series of blurry black-and-white newsreels flickers on the screen. Martian canals overflow their banks. A lake in Africa exhales a cloud of poison gas, killing thousands of villagers on its shores. Venice sinks. Anchorage, Alaska, is leveled by earthquakes. Pompeii is breaded and fried by its volcano. The swamp swallows another sand bar, then coughs up a tiny island. Subzero temperatures paralyze Acapulco. There have been several ice ages, a female narrator intones. The most recent lasted 90,000 years. A timer goes off and the lab assistant jerks awake. In about the time it takes to drink a glass of water, he remembers where he is. 

“This is probably the last time I will write to you . . .”   

The rocks applaud. Summers turn short and cool. The world remakes itself without us now.


Once when I was harmless
and didn’t know any better,

a mirror to the front of me
and an ocean behind,

I lay wedged in the middle of daylight,
paper-doll thin, dreaming,

then I vanished. I gave the day a fingerprint,
then forgot.

I sat naked on a towel
on a hot June Monday.

The sun etched the inside of my eyelids,
while a boy dozed at my side.

The smell of all oceans was around us—
steamy salt, shell, and sweat,

but I reached for the distant one.
A tide rose while I slept,

and soon I was alone. Try being
a figure in memory. It’s hollow there.

For truth’s sake, I’ll say she was on a beach
and her eyes were closed.

She was bare in the sand, long,
and the hour took her bit by bit.


It happened to me once.
Winter came, and snow quilted every inch.
I stood on the soapbox, as I was told,
and made staggering accusations. The public ignored,
so I retreated behind the potted yew.
I was waiting for a moment I was supposed to have

on a balcony overlooking the giant, gridded landscape.
The sounds I made underscored what I meant.
The potted yew was the face that I wore.
It was a metaphor for what could be.
The public endured.
I put the potted yew behind me. I made staggering an art.

That wasn’t the truth though. Winter
comes and negates all it covers. It doesn’t matter where I stand.
The balcony is a floor without walls.
The yew is a hurt that shadows.
The instance lives beneath us. Not just us, everybody.

The shadow hurts us. I make sounds like
the truth. Fate and theft are involved.
I think I told you this before. The floor is a wall that obscures.
The yew is quilt without color. Shadow is a fate you involved.
The yew on a balcony negates. I told you this before.
I was left undone. It’s what I meant. Underneath everyone.


They've flown south now 
and one Great Egret fishes the pond 
as broad-winged hawks begin their migrations, 
kenneling on thermal currents of wind 
off above yellowing mountains. 
Now, snakeweed blooms along the trail choking 
white and purple asters. A few bleeding 
leaves fall amidst wilting greenery. Poison 
Ivy turns red with warning. 
 
My eighty-three-year-old mother still argues 
with my father, twelve years dead. Their hatred 
reverberates in a back room 
of my head, rattling memories of my lonely childhood. 
Their loathing for each other 
colors all my days with pain. I loved him 
because he loved me best, but I look like her, 
my face and spirit tear at each other. 
Am I the child of hate? 
 
A wounded love sprouts like a weed 
from watery depths, uncultivated, 
flowers, white and purple, bloom, 
       even in these days of dying leaves. 
Beyond winter, 
       no one grieves.


The peach is 

a belly dancer's fruit. 
It has a navel eye for seeing
the world through the skin,
rounded buttocks good
to place against the hand
the way earth reminds flesh 
            of its being. 
 
Through the eye of the needle,
death is a country
where people wonder
and worry
what it's like to live. 
 
The sullen wish to live
and live soon
to be done with death
and the happy want to stay dead 
                                                  forever
wondering will it hurt to live
and is there death
after death?



While it is true 
(though only in a factual sense) 
That in the wake of a   
Her-I-can comes a   
Shower 
Surely I am not 
The gravitating force   
that keeps this house   
full of panthers 

Why, LBJ has made it   
quite clear to me   
He doesn’t give a 
Good goddamn what I think 
(else why would he continue to masterbate in public?) 

Rhythm and Blues is not 
The downfall of a great civilization 
And I expect you to 
Realize 
That the Temptations   
have no connection with   
The CIA 

We must move on to   
the true issues of   
Our time 
like the mini-skirt   
Rebellion 
And perhaps take a   
Closer look at 
Flour power 

It is for Us 
to lead our people   
out of the 
Wein-Bars 
   into the streets 
into the streets 
(for safety reasons only)   
Lord knows we don’t   
Want to lose the 
support 
of our Jewish friends 

So let us work 
for our day of Presence   
When Stokely is in 
The Black House 
And all will be right with   
Our World


childhood remembrances are always a drag   
if you’re Black 
you always remember things like living in Woodlawn   
with no inside toilet 
and if you become famous or something 
they never talk about how happy you were to have   
your mother 
all to yourself and 
how good the water felt when you got your bath   
from one of those 
big tubs that folk in chicago barbecue in   
and somehow when you talk about home   
it never gets across how much you 
understood their feelings 
as the whole family attended meetings about Hollydale 
and even though you remember 
your biographers never understand 
your father’s pain as he sells his stock   
and another dream goes 
And though you’re poor it isn’t poverty that 
concerns you 
and though they fought a lot 
it isn’t your father’s drinking that makes any difference   
but only that everybody is together and you 
and your sister have happy birthdays and very good   
Christmases 
and I really hope no white person ever has cause   
to write about me 
because they never understand 
Black love is Black wealth and they’ll 
probably talk about my hard childhood 
and never understand that 
all the while I was quite happy

Long before the fresh apple crisis, my life had some form to it. I would wake in the mornings—I would perform something. For example, the day I tried, as one with acute passion might, to win one woman over but accidentally won another—that whole time I had been living like someone. Though I can’t remember his name. His model of optimism provided me with a certain geography that I inhabit in time of need. This time the need was surprising. People tend to have faith that the juice they drink in the morning is the same juice they have always drunk. And apples take their shape naturally. The guy, whose name escapes me now, taught me to look upon others’ concerns as mine to make at home. I was fond of doing many things at home, but my favorite was drinking juice. When my friends came by—they liked to suddenly show up with all kinds of breads in their hands, thinking they knew what I needed and planning to force it on me—I had to tell them I was busy with my juice. Two weeks before the crisis, I had been writing some poems about it. It was a warm day, not entirely different from other warm days in San Francisco. People were on the street. Pale people were on the street, making it to the park and lying there such that the next day they were a little browned. The poems I had written were failures, but dense ones. It seemed appropriate to think the person’s attempt at wholeness was a series of missteps, which if drawn across an afternoon might prove interesting to other people. I had a way of reminding my friends that we were all in pain, but a fruit tart kind of pain strangers can’t help but enjoy. That day I had, in a sense, gathered all my possessions and gone out onto the street with them. I awoke that morning with an urgency to prepare myself for something—not anything life threatening, but definitely personal.
 
My lover, then, wanted to spend much of her life asleep. She had no ostensible reaction to the city’s sudden depletion of all its fresh apples and no hope for them. In a world where a person’s tastes revolve around the kind of sleep she gets, I could not find four people who cared. I thought that if I could find those four people we could really do something. A few of my friends pretended they were chosen. A few neighbors felt bad and made offers. My mother called to console me. My lover—in actuality, the closest person to being a member of the encumbered troop, slept next to me. Sleep became our network: falling in and out of it for change. The rule of survival is that no two people can lie in the same bed and sleep at the same time. So I kept an eye on her and played this game of freshness. If by morning I could quickly run out and do seven things that did not involve longing, she would reward me. Before the crisis, the reward would have needed only to be an apple one. But after the apples were gone. The landscape usually contains the solution to what’s lost. Demographics help people in cars. Some people did not notice me. Some demographers lose sleep and do not notice me. That was two days before. The evening before it was two days before the crisis, I was thinking that I did not think I was asleep. I had been watching the sunlight take the corner of my room and my housemate’s cat in it. When I looked again, there was no light—but I had not been asleep. It’s the way people react to traumatic events. They say, “I had just been there” or will say, “She was just with me.” So the loss of light was emotional and the lost state—demographic. I began to trace things by their disappearance. Alone in the room, my memory, and anticipated darkness going for light. People like to talk about the daytime. People in strange moods often miss the daytime. Before the crisis it was not often that one would find me in strange moods. I had managed a particular kind of balance fortified by a certain satisfaction of taste. I was happy. I mean, I was in my juice.
 
Five weeks before the crisis, I was employed at the natural foods grocery around the corner from my house. I did not really work there, but I went there every week. All but the third Sunday of each month, I would walk in and find all kinds of juice on sale. Not to buy, but to stand next to. Shorter people have the privilege of proximity to most cardboard signs. That was one thing. I would stand there and be something for taller people who couldn’t see. I had gotten into the habit of improvised customer service as a way to peruse the juice aisles without being noticed. My parents thought my talents should have led me somewhere. My father would always say, “If you’re not going to be a people person, then numbers will have to do.” He was surprised that with all the time I had on my hands, I chose to spend most of it alone. Numbers then did hold some mystery for me, but mostly too high and far-reaching to explore. For years I had known that if there was a wall between where I was and where I needed to be, I did not want it there. Some people have personal goals that are demanding. Certain goals make it impossible to lounge around in bed. My decision to drink only fresh juice, which costs as much as a small satisfying breakfast, kept me busy rounding up cash. I would have to leave most friendships behind. As a way of keeping my life “wall-free,” I had to divide my time. I would spend the first part of the day searching for volunteer positions in organic juice factories. The second part of my day I would spend telling people about the first part. The other parts are not of substance here.
 
Twenty-five years before the crisis I had for the first time what would eventually become known to me as apple juice. Twenty-three years later a magazine editor would reject my first attempt to recount that experience in litany. I am always drinking in my poems, a good friend says.
 
In the first years of my life, everything I ate was mush. Today I will tolerate only the toughest of green vegetables and date people who will always forget this. When I had that remarkable glass of apple juice, I had no idea that one day I simply would not be able to find it. The city gets rid of its apples. People find themselves inventing fruit. The day I decided to write poems about it—it was twelve days before the rumors began and fourteen days before the media coverage—I had been resting in my best friend’s easy chair. We were discussing the rise of the smoothie industry when something fantastic occurred to me. Five days later I had twenty poems. When a person writes a poem about her passions, people on the street are bound to notice them. The passions overwhelm the body. She carries the body as though it were the book. The friend whose easy chair gave way to my failures moved out of town the next week, and though I miss her it was the failures that saved me. On every other day any kind of crisis one finds particular sayings helpful. If certain words are spoken quietly into a cup of hot water, with the handle of the cup turned toward the wall, whatever strength found in the person may be mirrored in the wall. The person leaves the house with her hand against this wall but strutting slightly.
 
In the alley behind the natural foods grocery, I met my second lover for the first time. Meeting people in vulnerable places accentuates the passion later. Or it may be so hot that the lover never thinks in the present. And the weather was so hot during the crisis. Only the alleys had shade. Forty-eight days into the crisis, while on a thirst strike, I had to make a run for the alley. Not as though people were after me, but the elements. The foundation of anyone feeling that they must get away is need; at the bottom of any body-based need is grace. When I appeared at the opening of the alley, a woman who not twenty-four hours later would be dozing in my bed was stacking crates against the east-side wall. Women who work against surfaces inspire me to do things—I thought about telling her, or—short women make me want things. All the time while I was growing up I put a lot of demands on my juice; forty-eight days into the crisis she made me forget it. I did not forget it, but was embroiled. The newspapers were saying things about the past. People were celebrating thick juice, and I kept writing those poems. That day in the alley I realized three things about life. While assisting her I learned three things to carry around with me, to disperse when needed. For six months during the crisis, I did not care about the crisis.
 
When my faith returned all my lovers were gone. That morning I woke to the two hundred and thirty-second day of the crisis; I was beneath my bed. It was the sixth day that I had awakened beneath my bed. I was lonely, but I was also sure. Life without juice had taken on the name and shape of my weakest character, who—when we passed on the street—did not know me. I knew it was me by the way my head felt: people find themselves in an idea and feel so specified by the idea that they are compelled to show it. Today all my ideas are liquid. That day of my faith, friends thinking I was sick came by to see me. It would be the last day I spent alone; I was happy, but still would not drink. The juice on my mind was no longer juice. There was an absence there, but one so constant it became familiar. I did not want to drink it.


This prairie holds us 
with its plainness. 
An ugly wife. 
We would not stay but children comfort us 
and we need this flatness. 

On our table 
a carp with a tumor 
on its lip, 
larva eating its side. 

An old man laughs, 
one silver tooth 
in his head 
like a galvanized 
watertank. 

We are driven back 
into the land, 
our raccoon faces 
banded around the eyes 
with motorcycle goggles. 
Every car we had 
rusting in the yard. 

We saddle the buffalo 
and say we are captives. 
This barrenness holds 
us down like a wife.


Hunted and sung 
unhunted / unsung 

clump of 
loghouse / chaxed hill 

unuttered / unstrung 

clistered bow 
hunted and unsung 

hunted / strung 
hunted / sung.



I open the box of my favorite postcards   
and turn them over looking for de Chirico   
because I remember seeing you standing   
facing a wall no wider than a column where   
to your left was a hall going straight back 
into darkness, the floor a ramp sloping down   
to where you stood alone and where the room   
opened out on your right to an auditorium   
full of people who had just heard you read   
and were now listening to the other poet.   
I was looking for the de Chirico because of   
the places, the empty places. The word   
“boulevard” came to mind. Standing on the side   
of the fountains in Paris where the water   
blew onto me when I was fifteen. It was night.   
It was dark then too and I was alone.   
Why didn’t you find me? Why didn’t   
somebody find me all those years? The form   
of love was purity. An art. An architecture.   
Maybe a train. Maybe the shadow of a statue   
and the statue with its front turned away   
from me. Maybe one young girl playing alone,   
hearing even small sounds ring off cobblestones   
and the stone walls. I turn the cards looking   
for the one and come to Giacometti’s eyes   
full of caring and something remote. 
His eyes are loving and empty, but not with   
nothingness, not for the usual reasons, but because   
he is working. The Rothko Chapel empty. A cheap   
statue of Sappho in the modern city of Mytilene   
and ancient sunlight. David Park’s four men   
with smudges for mouths, backed by water,   
each held still by the impossibility of what   
art can accomplish. A broken river god, 
only the body. A girl playing with her rabbit in bed.   
The postcard of a summer lightning storm over Iowa.

I would like to decorate this silence,   
but my house grows only cleaner 
and more plain. The glass chimes I hung   
over the register ring a little 
when the heat goes on. 
I waited too long to drink my tea.   
It was not hot. It was only warm. 


I would not have gotten in this boat with you. 
I would not 
except 
where else was there 
at the dock’s end 
to go? 
The water 
was cold. 

I would not have let you row the boat. 
I could see 
what kind of man you were. 
I would not but 
who was there to choose 
between 
you and me? 

I would not have let you throw away the oars. 
I knew what would happen next, 
except 
what else was there to do, 
struggle 
in a boat with a leak 
over cold water?


I keep placing my hands over 
my face, the fingertips just 
resting on the place where I feel 
my eyebrows and the fine end 
of a bone. My eyes are covered 
with the blood of my hands, my 
palms hold 
my jaws. I do this at dinner. 
My daughter asks 
Are you all right?
and by a common miracle 
when I smile 
she knows I am. 

             2 

I ask her what she will do 
after we eat. Sleep she 
tells me. But I will clean 
the deer skull, wash it. 

             3 

You gave me this skull in the woods 
told me to bring it clean 
and tell the story I had told you 
before, about how the deer had 
come to me, and I said I would. 

             4 

And I put this skull on an old 
newspaper, pulled the lower part 
of the jaws free, touched it first 
carefully, as if it would fall apart 
in my hands, the bone paper- 
thin, and then I saw I could 
scrub, so brushed the surface with 
steel and my fingers and more 
and more this surface became 
familiar to me. 

             5 

I wanted to see the lines of it 
what it would be if it had been 
polished by the wind, the water, 
and my hands, these agents making 
the skull more itself. 
Slowly I was not afraid at all 
and my fingers went into the deepest 
holes of this thing, not afraid 
for myself or it, feeling 
suddenly as if cleaning this 
small fragment of earth away 
from the crevices inside was 
like loving. 

            6 

But it was when I touched the place 
where the eyes were that I knew 
this was the shell of the deer that had 
lived here, this was this deer 
and not this deer, her home and 
now empty of her, but not 
empty of her, I knew also, not 
empty of her, as my hands 
trembled. 

            7 

And in that instant remembered you 
had been in that body of 
that deer dying, what 
does it feel like to be a deer 
dying, the death consumes 
you like birth, you are 
nowhere else but in the center. 

            8 

Remembering those gentle deer 
that watched me as I wept, 
or the deer that leapt as if 
out of my mind, when I saw 
speaking there in that green place 
the authority of the heart 
and the deer of the woods where 
my feet stood, stared at me until 
I whispered to her and cried 
at her presence. 

            9 

And when I cleaned the skull 
I washed myself and sat 
my body half out of the water 
and put my hands again over 
my face, my fingers edging the 
bone over my eyes, and I thought 
how good this feels and this 
is a gesture you make. 

            10 

Tell this story of the deer’s skull 
you asked quietly and so I 
came in my own time to put 
these words carefully here 
slowly listing each motion 
on this thin paper 
as fragile and as tough 
as knowledge. 


In the very night of movement where I
sought a sequential self –
The sea as blood, thought as
Earth that changes the sea
 
Changes the fishes in it
for the fortunes of landscapes
are in the fantasies
of architecture
 
H —        taught to sing
siren scales by ear
by rote or immersion
abroad
 
In the discrepancy of double exposure
Casts of light crack time’s microscope


a rooftop has an enemy
 
an owl
 
a cone of confusion
 
 
scansion of acoustics
 
or before sound
 
a crematorium
 
 
visually unresolved
 
(before)           remains
 
 
leaves that only look
 
like the birds
 
between them
 
 
physiology limits
visual memory
 
 
ash or     bodies
in glass


Before the moths have even appeared
to orbit around them, the streetlamps come on,
a long row of them glowing uselessly
 
along the ring of garden that circles the city center,
where your steps count down the dulling of daylight.
At your feet, a bee crawls in small circles like a toy unwinding.
 
Summer specializes in time, slows it down almost to dream.
And the noisy day goes so quiet you can hear
the bedraggled man who visits each trash receptacle
 
mutter in disbelief: Everything in the world is being thrown away!
Summer lingers, but it’s about ending. It’s about how things
redden and ripen and burst and come down. It’s when
 
city workers cut down trees, demolishing
one limb at a time, spilling the crumbs
of twigs and leaves all over the tablecloth of street.
 
Sunglasses! the man softly exclaims
while beside him blooms a large gray rose of pigeons
huddled around a dropped piece of bread.



Eyes wide like an owl’s, an aspirin-pale face
foretells in lamplight how it accumulates age.
Somewhat masked, somewhat naked, there’s no way
to know what others see when looking at it.
All five of the body’s senses crowd
on this small planet a weather of hair surrounds.
 
My face is not a democracy—the eyes are tyrants
and the ears are radical dissenters.
In the conversations of eyebrows, mine are whispers.
Like the window at night, the face reflects too,
uncertain how to change when greeting itself
(and is it not cruel when another’s face
won’t reflect acknowledgment of you?).
 
My mother, my father, and my brother are found
in the blurring of feature and expression.
Cynicism finds no purchase here;
the same cannot be said for sadness
(and look deeper—anger hides in the jaw).
And while the nose quietly broods
like an actor rehearsing his soliloquy,
the empty page of the forehead, when I raise my brows,
fills suddenly with questions.


After Rabelais' Gargantua and Pantagruel
His Exterior

toes like blue glass marbles 
nails like wax shavings 
feet like those of an elephant   
heels like narrow escapes 
soles like yellow sponges expanding in water   
legs like longitude and latitude   
knees like neon headlights 
thighs like open desert in a movie   
hips like a leaping horse 
a belly button like a luminescent watch   
pubic hair like frontier instances   
a penis like overnight mail 
balls large as a boar-hound’s 
seminal vesicles like tulip bulbs in a paper bag   
testicle muscles like rising chords   
an asshole like an undiscovered planet   
buttocks like a fleet antelope’s   
a sacrum like plein air painting   
a back like a chalked sidewalk   
a spinal column like a suspension bridge   
ribs like a bookcase 
a sternum like gum 
shoulder blades like kitchen tables   
a chest like a stuffed animal 
pectorals like floating bars of soap   
shoulders like observed facts 
arms like lassos 
fingers like sparklers 
wrist bones like a shipyard 
elbows like antidotes 
hands like passports 
an Adam’s apple like a great circle course 
a beard like Whitman’s 
a chin like a lichen-splotched rock   
ears like a full bathtub 
a nose like a birdcage 
nostrils like subway tunnels   
eyebrows like a captive audience   
a birthmark like a stop sign   
eyelids like a partial eclipse   
eyes like effervescence 
optical nerves like an orchid 
a forehead like a window display   
temples like singing crickets   
cheeks like party invitations   
jaws like handcuffs 
teeth like sweet tea 
a tongue like watercolors 
a mouth like a silk lampshade   
a face like a moving picture   
a head like a jar of pennies   
a skull like a geode 
skin with a black line running down it   
epidermis like a wool sweater   
whiskers like a street sweeper   
and hair like a cloudy day. 


His Interior

cerebellum like a coffee grinder 
cerebral lobes like a house on fire 
cranial membranes like a construction-paper diorama   
optical nerves like a developing Polaroid 
cerebral fornix like colonial maps 
pineal gland like a giant pinecone 
circulatory system like cello strings 
eardrums like a still life with oranges 
forehead like television   
backbone like a fiddlehead fern 
nerve channels like transatlantic cables 
uvula like a propeller   
palate like a telegram 
saliva like a rotating sprinkler 
tonsils like action figures 
stomach like professional wrestling 
trachea like pirate radio 
throat like a bold headline 
lungs like plastic bags caught in a tree 
heart like a supernova 
pulmonary membranes like dirigibles 
arteries like rush hour   
diaphragm like the sound barrier 
liver like a public trial 
veins like Japanese characters 
spleen like a rogue   
bowels like surrealism   
guts like an inheritance 
small intestine like fake pearls 
large intestine like stolen currency 
colon like reliable data   
rectum like a fade-out   
kidneys like a barrier reef 
loins like a mowed lawn   
renal veins like gossip   
sperm glands like lava beds   
prostate like a fissure vent   
bladder like a fish bowl   
abdomen like a leather suitcase   
muscles like an assembly line   
tendons like pickpockets   
ligaments like safety pins   
bones like bones 
marrow like realism 
cartilage like strips of kelp   
lymph glands like sentimentality   
urine like sugar water   
blood like melted crayons   
and sperm like flies in amber. 


How He Acts

If he laughs, it’s spontaneous combustion   
If he mutters, it’s a retreating glacier 
If he pouts, he sharpens his horn on stones 
If he jumps up and down, its hard to look away 
If he scratches himself, it’s with an aspen branch 
If he gets angry, he fights with tooth, horn, and heel   
If he spits, he fights his own kind   
If he blows his nose, it starts a riot   
If he sweats, it’s monsoons 
If he coughs, it unlocks doors in the next room 
If he argues, it’s over lost rituals 
If he sighs, it ruffles goldfinch feathers   
If he whistles, it’s overheard miles away   
If he snores, it’s over nostalgic reveries 
If he scowls, spears launch from his eyes   
If he snorts, it’s over gilt lion-head spouts   
If he shits, it’s historical documents   
If he belches, it’s a diary 
If he vomits, there’s finger-pointing all around 
If he walks, it’s Chaplin 
If he writes, it’s manifestos 
If he goes shopping, it’s for lentils and peas   
If he dances, it’s the Rites of Spring   
If he swears, he’s a ryght cruell beast 
If he drives, it’s among the Mountains of the Moon   
If he bathes, it’s in deceptive surfaces   
If he dresses, it’s a white linen suit   
If he wonders, it’s if his own reflection   
If he’s jealous, it’s of birthday parties   
If he lies, it’s about mathematical errors   
If he spends money, it’s on magic lanterns   
If he goes to the movies, it’s Vertigo
If he listens to music, it’s the sound of running water 
If he falls, it’s down a slope of turf into the bushes   
If he recites, it’s from the Beast Epic of Alexandria   
If he is seduced, it’s a river of electricity 
If he is curious, he attempts to draw 
If he calls, it’s about weather patterns 
If he sings, it’s ‘Tyger, Tyger’ 
and if he escapes, he’s swift of foot.


I cannot know twisted Henriette of the plant kingdom
Engrafted with a crutch. And yet her bulbous concerns
Effuse a solid blue from inside,
Like a steel Dryad, and her gaze effaced
 
Shines with distended power. Otherwise
These clusterjewels would not dazzle us so,
As limbs proliferate through her pulped brain
From dendrites where creation flared
 
And this crippled tree would seem defaced,
J’Accuse! beneath the lace of this clipped sister
And would not glisten in synaptic blasts
 
Would not, from all the reaching boughs of self,
Burst like ripe sapphires: for here there is no place
That does not see you. You shake forth a nest.


They travel in threes, usually in station waggons or utes,
often have dogs, and eat out of cans in country motels, 
always the one on the edge of town –
near the truckstop with good hamburgers –
I remember the Isis Motel in Guyra
 
They drive old cars, or horses made of wind, 
whose manes are streamers of wind. They tend 
to wear black. I have met them as young as fourteen – 
Beck’s friend Kristin had written her autobiography
already, it was called ‘These Days’ but it was stuck
 
in her computer somewhere, in the shed 
at her mother’s. Her mother and the girlfriend, 
they were also storm spirits. 
They taught swimming
and they were kind at first, often charming
 
After watching the birds’ mating rituals
on the forest floor at the bottom of the steep train, 
under the speckled trees, we decide to go north. 
We borrow Beck’s sister Jade’s car,
and Alecto gets her licence first go.
 
We hear the Sibyl is staying at the Isis Motel. 
This time there’s no bush festival, no whip-plaiter, 
the pumpkins from the scarecrow bellies 
have all been eaten in baked dinners cooked for the 
Lamb and Potato Festival. That will be fifty-three dollars.
 
The others shower and go to bed, I’m as usual awake. 
At night across the road, five types of frogs set up 
their orchestra, and the Mother of Ducks lagoon throbs 
around the gazebo – tree frogs like the ones at home
chaka-chaka, chaka-chaka
 
I go out and unroll my sleeping bag on the picnic table
suspended over the lagoon, and watch
the sun come up over the railway line. 
In the distance across a golf course, I see smoke
and walking I come to a woman in black near a tent.
 
The Cumaean Sibyl, I presume? I say.
She laughs in her mantle, invites me in.
– So you’ve left the infernal regions too, I say
and she laughs again, going out and poking kindling
under the damp logs. I notice a laptop on her sleeping-bag.
 
She’s written a book about birds in New England
which she shows me. No one reads it, she says,
except ornithologists. She’s now writing a manual 
for editors. When she goes out to the fire 
I look at her hand-written page
 
‘Parts of a publication: sections and paras,
signposts and transitions, running heads and feet.’
Any news from home? I ask.
The singer is failing to get his wife back, she says.
The ferry man batted him back with an oar.
 
I prophecy he’ll be torn to pieces, she says,
and offers to cook me some kidney.
Where are your sisters? she asks.
I say they’re at the motel.
Well, they won’t be getting kidney, she says.
 
Our New England holiday over, and no other prophecies
from the Sibyl, we’re drive south through the Moonbi Hills 
and down past the Emirates’ horse stud at Murrurrundi
through bull-dozed mountains the Sibyl says you once went round,
past the cones of a giant power station and the sign:
 
Muswellbrook – City of Power. And on to the Newcastle freeway.
Back in Sydney at the hostel, the girl at the front desk leans forward: 
Have we heard? About Beck? She’s sorry, Beck has been killed 
in a car accident near Bulahdelah. 
Automatically I touch my dreads and groan.


A drunk cadet had hit them on a bad bend near the river,
two broken necks. On the notice-board there’s an A4 page 
with a blurred digital photo of Beck laughing, leaning 
into her friends in a nightclub and below that, writing: 
We Love You Beck – from Kristin, Colette and Mandy.
 
I sit like an automaton in the big lounge room
my back teeth snapping against each other,
rocks in my gut. That night we watch on an iMac 
a video of Beck, an eight minute film Colette 
had taken on her phone. 
 
Two of the men are crying. Kristin and Mandy are numb. 
I move to the noticeboard, reading anything:
‘Live-in nanny required Balmain 5 min from city’
‘Experience life on an outback station help mustering
mobs of 2000 animals on horseback or quadbike’.
 
Near me two women are whispering. Talking 
about their first-ever girlfriend. One says,
Other people are always either versions or not-versions 
of her. Fourteen, it’s an age to break your heart. You know 
nothing. On the edge of knowing too much.
 
I lean forward, my head on the foyer koala.
Voices travel to me from distant realms:
I hear again the singer’s plea for his wife.
Blurred from too much experience
I prowl around the leaflet racks, groaning.
 
Late that night on the vinyl lounges the people remaining 
are Kristin and me, alone. My eyes are swollen, 
my ears still buzzing from the headphones at work. 
We talk over Beck till no more can be said.
Now Kristin begins to tell her own story 
 
how her uncle had his boat down the back 
of their block, and one day  
he said he wanted to show her something,
took her down the lantana path to the boat, 
something she might like, he said –
 
Kristin was raped at times twice a day 
or sometimes not for a week 
and sometimes after it he gave her pocket
money once a twenty dollar bill which down
the gully later she tore into thin red strips and buried.
 
Back at the house her mother 
bashed her for lying about the uncle,
who was her brother, and who had loaned them 
the deposit on the house where Kristin and Odette
her sister were fortunate enough to live.
 
When Kristin grew up, her mother apologised to her.
The uncle was still alive. He had sent her a 
Christmas card this year. She sat on the lounge, 
looking down at her runners, her mouth closed.
Behind her the stereogram and Elvis, a silent witness.
 
The uncle had said she was a rude girl, she should 
keep quiet about their secret otherwise 
he’d give her little sister a taste of the same.
Kristin was quiet from then on. The reason she was 
telling me now, her hand on my arm
 
was that last week she’d had a call from Odette 
who was living in London.
The uncle during those primary 
school years had done the same to her, tricked her
the same way, used the same words.
 
I feel the weight of my empty useless arms.
But later I hold her – hug her goodnight.
She touches my shoulder. I was convinced, she says, 
I was saving my sister. 
My head clatters: Virgin, May I help you?
 
Back in the Furies’ bunk-room it’s beauty night, 
they’re whisking egg whites for a face mask …
After they’ve done each other they sit me on the bed 
and paint my face with their fingers
the egg white sets quickly and they tell me not to smile.
 
I dream of Alecto’s iron tower and bloody clothes –
then I’m on TV being interviewed: So, the oldest Fury –
and who is your god? I am asked – I once served Artemis, I say. 
And before that? – Athena, I say – Anath, Isis. 
I do not mention Dionysis or the Thracian women.


We say lightning has no wings
when it slides down our houses
 
We say loss is just a condition
we acquire to bury our pity further
 
We say the bleeding hands
on the table filled with red wine
imported products and passports
are just reminders of 
who we have become
 
We have no titles no birthright
no groves or Shakespeare
to return to
 
We apologize for the fear
growing out of our ribs
 
Apologize for the numbers
still etched on our tongues



One hundred breaths split the air
as I lean
on the only pine tree I find.
It’s early or late, it’s breezy or hot.
The fields are dry. Summer is near.
The horses are everywhere, 
strangely galloping a dream,
but I can’t remember
how to call them,
so I stand back, watch them pass.
The first time I rode a horse
my body found the music of fire,
crackling the wind. An unbearable pleasure
that also left me with a burn on the side of my leg.
A sign, the horsekeeper told me, of longing.
A need to return—to belong.
After all, departure is like
pushing the weight of our heart
against the village
whose name has kept us awake.
Rafael came from somewhere in Eurasia.
I passed my hands through his mane—
saw a history of conquests and battles,
a field of hay, a mount of truth,
heard a silent ring,
his eyes asking me to go with him,
to confess something sacred,
to name something lustful.
Nothing of where he came from, 
or who I was, disturbed us.
I knew he was different by the way he ran—
without pause,
without grace,
without distraction,
without ease.
He was told how to move in the world
and resented it.
He knew he would never own anything.
He came toward me.
It was a quiet afternoon.
I stood unmoving.
And we listened to the untitled music
circling the earth like an anthem
free of its nation.
He was unfamiliar to me, 
approaching as if he possessed the land.
Every morning he stopped five feet
from the river.


To pray you open your whole self 
To sky, to earth, to sun, to moon 
To one whole voice that is you. 
And know there is more 
That you can’t see, can’t hear; 
Can’t know except in moments 
Steadily growing, and in languages 
That aren’t always sound but other 
Circles of motion. 
Like eagle that Sunday morning 
Over Salt River. Circled in blue sky 
In wind, swept our hearts clean 
With sacred wings. 
We see you, see ourselves and know 
That we must take the utmost care 
And kindness in all things. 
Breathe in, knowing we are made of 
All this, and breathe, knowing 
We are truly blessed because we 
Were born, and die soon within a 
True circle of motion, 
Like eagle rounding out the morning 
Inside us. 
We pray that it will be done 
In beauty. 
In beauty.


At dawn the panther of the heavens peers over the edge of the world.   
She hears the stars gossip with the sun, sees the moon washing her lean   
darkness with water electrified by prayers. All over the world there are those   
who can't sleep, those who never awaken.   

My granddaughter sleeps on the breast of her mother with milk on   
her mouth. A fly contemplates the sweetness of lactose. 

Her father is wrapped in the blanket of nightmares. For safety he   
approaches the red hills near Thoreau. They recognize him and sing for   
him.   

Her mother has business in the house of chaos. She is a prophet dis-   
guised as a young mother who is looking for a job. She appears at the   
door of my dreams and we put the house back together.   

Panther watches as human and animal souls are lifted to the heavens by   
rain clouds to partake of songs of beautiful thunder.   

Others are led by deer and antelope in the wistful hours to the vil-   
lages of their ancestors. There they eat cornmeal cooked with berries   
that stain their lips with purple while the tree of life flickers in the sun.   

It's October, though the season before dawn is always winter. On the   
city streets of this desert town lit by chemical yellow travelers   
search for home.   

Some have been drinking and intimate with strangers. Others are   
escapees from the night shift, sip lukewarm coffee, shift gears to the   
other side of darkness.   

One woman stops at a red light, turns over a worn tape to the last   
chorus of a whispery blues. She has decided to live another day.   

The stars take notice, as do the half-asleep flowers, prickly pear and   
chinaberry tree who drink exhaust into their roots, into the earth.   

She guns the light to home where her children are asleep and may   
never know she ever left. That their fate took a turn in the land of   
nightmares toward the sun may be untouchable knowledge.   

It is a sweet sound.   

The panther relative yawns and puts her head between her paws.   
She dreams of the house of panthers and the seven steps to grace.


At the carnival, Robo-Boy sees only things he recognizes. The Ferris Wheel is an overgrown version of his own bells and whistle eyes. His Flashers, his mother calls them. The Tilt-A-Whirl is the angle his head tilts when the Flirt Program goes into effect, usually in the vicinity of a Cindy or a Carrie, though once he found himself tilting at the school librarian which caused him to wheel in reverse into the Civil War section knocking over a cart of books that were waiting to be shelved under B. There’s a dangerously low stratosphere of pink cotton-candy clouds being carried around by the children. If Robo-Boy goes near them, the alarms will go off. It’s the kind of sticky that would cause joint-lock for sure. In a darker, safer corner Robo-Boy finds the Whack-A-Mole game. He pays a dollar and starts whacking the plastic moles on their heads each time they pop up from the much-dented log. He wins bear after bear. It’s only when he's lugging them home, the largest one skidding face-down along the sidewalk getting dirt on its white nose and light blue belly, that he remembers the program: Wac-A-Mole Realism™—the disc on the installer’s desk. Suddenly it all fits together: the way a deliciously strange thought will start wafting out of his unconscious—and then WHAM, it disappears.


In the aftermath of calculus 
your toast fell butter-side down. 

Squirrels swarmed the lawns 
in flight patterns. The hovercraft 

helped the waves along. From 
every corner there was perspective. 

On the billboards the diamonds 
were real, in the stores, only zirconia. 

I cc’ed you. I let you know. 
Sat down to write the Black Ice Memo. 

Dinner would be meager & 
reminiscent of next week’s lunch. 

So what if I sat on the sectional? 
As always I was beside myself.

For part of one strange year we lived 
in a small house at the edge of a wood. 
No neighbors, which suited us. Nobody 
to ask questions. Except 
for the one big question we went on 
asking ourselves.
                         That spring 
myriads of birds stopped over
briefly. Birds we’d never seen before, drawn 
to our leafy quiet and our brook and because, 
as we later learned, the place lay beneath 
a flyway. Flocks appeared overnight—birds 
brilliant or dull, with sharp beaks
or crossed bills, birds small 
and enormous, all of them pausing 
to gorge at the feeder, to rest their wings, 
and disappear. Each flock seemed surer than we 
of a destination. By the time we’d watched them 
wing north in spring, then make 
an anxious autumn return, 
we too had pulled it together and we too moved 
into what seemed to be our lives.

and on the waves in turmoil
in the harbor
gulls floated
like pieces of paper
set adrift, little
boat-like birds
twirling
in the wind-tossed waves
that drove into
the strong arms of the seawall
at the apex of the bay
where a statue of Sappho stands,
young woman
with a lyre—not
looking out to sea
but glancing at the curve
of the seawall
and the birds,
those lost notes
before rain


for Sappho
Let my music be found wanting
in comparison
to yours (as it must)

let me be found loving
(as you were)
extravagantly the beautiful

let me find you
and the song (forever)
between us

in these terrible times

Feet firmly perch
thinnest stalks, reeds, bulrush.
Until all at once, they attend my
female form, streaked throat, brownness.

Three fly equidistant
around me, flashing.
Each, in turn, calls territorial
trills, beckons ok-a-li, ok-a-li!

Spreads his wings, extends
inner muscle quivering red
epaulet bands uniquely bolden.

Turn away each suitor,
mind myself my audience.
Select another to consider,
He in turn quiver thrills.

Leave for insects.
Perhaps one male follows.
Maybe a few brood of young,
line summertime.

Silver Maple samaras
wing wind, spread clusters
along with mine, renewing Prairie.

As summer closes, I leave
dragonflies, damselflies, butterflies,
mosquitoes, moths, spiders, crickets for

grain, see, Sunflower;
join thousands to flock Sky—
grackles, blackbirds, cowbirds,     starlings—
Swarming like distant smoke clouds, rising.

Underneath ice caps, once glacial peaks
deer, elk, vixen begin to ascend.
Free creatures camouflaged as
waves and waves receding far

from plains pulling

upward slopes and faraway snow dusted mountains.
On spotted and clear cut hills robbed of fir,
high above wheat tapestried valleys, flood plains
up where headwaters reside.

Droplets pound, listen.

Hoofed and pawed mammals
pawing and hoofing themselves up, up. 
Along rivers dammed by chocolate beavers,
trailed by salamanders—mud puppies.

Plunging through currents,
          above concrete and steel man-made barriers

these populations of plains, prairies, forests flee
in such frenzy, popping splash dance,
pillaging cattail zones, lashing lily pads—
the breath of life in muddy ponds, still lakes.

Liquid beads slide on windshield glass

along cracked and shattered pane,
spider-like with webs and prisms.
“Look, there, the rainbow
touched the ground both ends down!”

Full arch seven colors showered, heed
what Indigenous know, why long ago,
they said no one belongs here, surrounding them,
that this land was meant to be wet with waters of nearby
not fertile to crops and domestic graze.

The old ones said,

“When the animals leave this place
the waters will come again.
This power is beyond the strength of man.
The river will return with its greatest force.”

No one can stop her.
          She was meant to be this way.
                         Snakes in honor, do not intrude.

The rainbow tied with red and green like
that on petal rose, though only momentarily.
Colors disappear like print photographs fade.
They mix with charcoal surrounding.

A flurry of fowl follow

like strands, maidenhair falls,
from blackened clouds above
swarming inward
covering the basin and raising sky.

Darkness hangs over

the hills appear as black water crests,
blackness varying shades.
The sun is somewhere farther than the farthest ridge .
Main gravel crossroads and back back roads

slicken to mud, clay.
          Turtles creep along rising banks, snapping jowls.

Frogs chug throaty songs.
The frogs only part of immense choir
heralding the downpour, the falling oceans.
Over the train trestle, suspension bridge with

current so slick everything slides off in sheets.

Among rotten stumps in black bass ponds,
somewhere catfish reel in fins and crawl,
walking whiskers to higher waters.
Waters above, below

the choir calling it forth.

Brightly plumed jays and dull brown-headed cowbirds
fly as if hung in one place like pinwheels.
They dance toward the rain crest, 
the approaching storm

beckoning, inviting, summoning.

A single sparrow sings the stroke of rain
past the strength of sunlight.
The frog chorus sings refrain,
melody drumming thunder,

evoked by beasts and water creatures wanting their homes.
Wanting to return to clearings and streams where ash, or
white birch woods rise,    tower over,
quaking aspen stand against
storm shown veils—sheeting rains crossing

pasture, meadow, hills, mountain.
Sounds erupt.
Gathering clouds converge, push,
pull, push, pull forcing lightning

back and forth shaping 
windy, sculptured swans, mallard ducks, and giants
from stratocumulus media.
As if they are a living cloud chamber,
As if they exist only in the heavens.

Air swells with dampness.
          It has begun.


rush to which 
            in music I’ve space ready in May 
                        percussion getting unasked choice 
                              too car too truck beyond wishes   
       everyone cannot have the keys of nicety 
                              repercussion bit scrap of that roll broom   
                         pattern of bits 
                               to see world sand dollars in one language   
                            space fills thought 
            hopper the hours of the block 
bang to the real plain warp 
            it is easy to ask from rush hour like useful telephone   
calls simultaneously around our heads 
                                  untouched by seldom thought   
                            rubble gallop red path on the real part   
                            remove is unsuccessful as follow turns 
after the sliver bin bench 
    combination finds 
                      ment middle blade coast 
                                  similar and acquaint them which wonder   
                      many kinds of stuff in the concerns of life   
                               skin the plate 
                                  till all the moisture be very clean if   
                                     very short 
                                  the care of a particular person is fit   
               holidays come on a Monday and will frequently go   
away 
                         on the tramp of which are placed ballads   
   cribed cloths to scribble it 
                                  Thursday per week 
                                 spinning children sented to the reducing   
                         of silk 
                                        wheel to her work rather runs backwards   
and forwards 
   both methods are a long stick and round by an empty one 
                  I shall describe or fixed on draws out 
                                       the hand is in the basket 
                              potatoes are in the bag from the sufficient   
          empty one 
                                           wool thod   
               hank on cows 
                                           whirling any other earn be very white   
             from mit worms this shell-fish this spinning please   
             fection made worms semble 
    but that bow lever the window 
      curtain to warm you 
       dream pin or on so many others   
         emergency say bottom snow 
          fill up of and sentimental tickle 
                      look foolish and know my prima golden weary 
                                  suitable for a mental might 
                           of sentimental weep for into more 
                                    tickle little confess 
                                    the more regretted cozy paradise 
                                    the nature of my thirty-seven of whom   
                        my own astonished sequel 



the bird carries its peck up the branch   
                        or more 
                        of the which pretty little flower 
       ear dozen 

                              study forces the day upright 
                        pretty flower to protect the eye in sunshine   
                                    with a white is made tall in warm   
                           stalks 
                              the dead are used over 
                              the major insects was that 
                              tile the rent become mortgage money 
      fortress replaced by a more natural forest 
                               tints the tall flowers 
                  leap the embarrassment of a great subject   
            high in my own eyes hanging over the day 
      from this aviation is clumsy 
                      or even desirable diction 
                     nook soaring when the moon is how romantic   
                   music pera slid clear 
                              shadow when omitted is obviously wrong   
                     or no 
               lighting by trees is beautiful 


I

A cave with arms at the mouth.
Our hero is blind: everything he hears he sees.

Hear! Gold light sifts to his ear.
A roar. The seas
beaten—his duodenum, colon,
blind intestine and appendix, destined
for heat, they blush.

II

William's cabbage heart shook. 
He dragged himself from the dirt.

If he could rest his ears he could see 
ginkgos in his city. The pretty boy I mean
& Will, who were both aging 
with their senses curbed until they knew
New York City by the root & crack.

III

As if there is a fig tree rooted in heaven 
& each of its leaves knows all the rules.

8:45 a.m. hum: he saw the boy had fallen
into a manhole & the fig tree had fallen into a manhole
& neither could be the sound of hands splitting
gold hands landed
up the breadth of William's back.

            God bleeding me a kind of blooded cry 
            my lady makes me a heron
            or my leg for a stump 
            the cursed in loam my 
            venomous thumbs my

His guts an a-readied muck.

IV

If your hand had been dusk-
yellow not a lantern but winged 
—a bridge or a dove sprung 
from the dirt.

Trying to make a shape. The feathered 
thumb herring—
bone. We would not fall.

V

I brought you in from the garden since I can't 
stand the trees' visions. William you will 
be there the last
stately in ribbons.

But the vision is a fattened glee.
The glee is a clubfoot.
The glee is a mutt.
The eyes sewn up the air & nothing can be seen
but visions.

You are burst sideways like a fist in water. 
Your maker staring into an apron of mud.
Thou art
           bore a hole in the man. 
Thou art
           not a bloody bit, not the man.


I

A boy was covered in pigeons.
He put birdseed in his hair and crotch so the ghostbird
would descend and devour him.

I saw the brown bird with the yellow breast
smoking Lucky Strikes. Thought she might be the Holy Spirit.
There are no birds only what this typewriter flushes out.
The cliffs are made from stone doves.
And the boys had beautiful lips.

II

The Outside suggests a tunnel to ride what he
says through a tunnel. Geography, animal life, the eventual
human being. Anatomy on the page
is sexier, my ghost.
The page of real thigh, my mister,
opens at the top to be eaten like
the sun you can recognize eats her rays. Greasy misery
covers my hands. It bothers
me to touch a carcass. Dead branches. Bothers me.

III

God's big eye is a pink cubicle. 
God's big eye stretches 
around me, a great balled gown.

I look for him in the roots of the roofless space. 
Mons pubis corresponds to the real bird.

The lung. The wing.

IV

I demand the air beat. The birds scared
up into motion and I expect
revelation. I have my lusty knife.
Left cigarettes on your grave
and chant. J is for Jerusalem. Returns the poet to an invisible
homeland.
Resurrects the liver.
           Saying goodbye to a ghost is a hoax. 
The birds are still in flight. Unhook the birds.

V

Sick orange sky I hate
I shall see it opened, the sunny aftertomb
and a real poem at the gate.

The erratic footprints of birds upon the sand or lacerations. 
No limbs at our disposal, only the desire of limbs to reflesh. 
The ghost gestures.

I am filling your borders with letters. 
This is the new word—get up and live.


For Christ’s sake,
learn to type
and have something
to fall back on.
 
Be someone,
make something of yourself,
look at Gertrudo Ganley.
 
Always draw the curtains
when the lights are on.
 
Have nothing to do
with the Shantalla gang,
get yourself a right man
with a Humber Sceptre.
 
For Christ’s sake
wash your neck
before going into God’s house.
 
Learn to speak properly,
always pronounce your ings.
Never smoke on the street,
don’t be caught dead
in them shameful tight slacks,
 
spare the butter,
economise,
 
and for Christ’s sake
at all times,
watch your language.

As a teenager
she was like any other,
boys, the craic,
smoking down the backs.
 
Later there was talk
she broke things,
furniture and glass,
her mother’s heart.
 
‘Mad at the world,’
the old women nod,
round each other’s faces.
 
But it was more
than that
and for less
she was punished.
 
That weekend
she didn’t leave a cup alone
every chair hit the wall,
Philomena’s revenge.
 
Soon after
she was shifted
and given the shocks.
 
Round each other’s faces
the old women nod
‘Treatment, treatment
they’ve given her the treatment.’
 
These days
she gets on with the furniture,
wears someone else’s walk,
sees visions in glass.
 
She’s good too
for getting the messages;
small things, bread and milk
sometimes the paper,
 
and closing the gate
after her father drives out,
she waits for his signal
he always shouts twice,
 
‘Get the gate Philo,
get the gate, girl.’


“The experience of truth is indispensible 
for the experience of beauty and the sense 
of beauty is guided by a leap in the dark.” 
Arthur Koestler
I.

Stoplights edged the licorice street with ribbon, 
neon embroidering wet sidewalks. She turned 

into the driveway and leaped in the dark. A blackbird 
perched on the bouncing twig of a maple, heard 

her whisper, “Stranger, lover, the lost days are over. 
While I walk from car to door, something inward opens 

like four o’clocks in rain. Earth, cold from autumn, 
pulls me. I can’t breathe the same 

with dirt for marrow and mist for skin, 
blurring my vision, my vision’s separate self. 

I stand drunk in this glitter, under the sky’s grey shelter. 
The city maple, not half so bitter, hurls itself 

in two directions, until both tips darken and disappear, 
as I darken my reflection in the smoking mirror 

of my home. How faint the sound of dry leaves, 
like the clattering keys of another morning, another world.” 

                                       II.

She looked out the window at some inward greying door. 
The maple held her glance, made ground fog from her cigarette. 

Beyond uneven stairs, children screamed, 
gunned each other down. Then she sealed her nimble dreams 

with water from a murky bay. “For him I map 
this galaxy of dust that turns without an answer. 

When it rains, I remember his face in the corridor 
of a past apartment and trace the anguish around his mouth, 

his wrinkled forehead, unguarded eyes, the foreign fruit 
of an intricate sadness. With the grace that remains, 

I catch a glint around a door I cannot enter. 
The clock echoes in dishtowels; I search love’s center 

and bang pans against the rubble of my day, the lucid 
grandeur of wet ground, the strangeness of a fatal sun 

that makes us mark on the margin of our loss, 
trust in the gossamer of touch, trust in the late-plowed field.” 

                                       III.

When the sun opened clouds and walked into her mongrel soul, 
she chopped celery into rocky remnants of the sea, 

and heard fat sing up bread, a better dying. 
The magnet in each seed of the green pepper kept her flying, 

floating toward memories that throb like clustered stars: 
the dark water laughter of ducks, a tangle of November oaks, 

toward sudden music on a wheel of brilliant dust 
where like a moon she must leap back and forth 

from emptiness. “I remember the moon shimmering 
loss and discovery along a water edge, and skirting 

a slice of carrot, I welcome eternity in that sad eye of autumn. 
Rare and real, I dance while vegetables sing in pairs. 

I hug my death, my chorus of years, and search 
and stretch and leap, for I will be apprentice to the blood 

in spite of the mood of a world 
that keeps rusting, rusting the wild throats of birds.” 

                                       IV.

In lamplight she saw the smoke of another’s dream: 
her daughter walk woods where snow weighs down pine, 

her son cry on a bridge that ends in deep-rooted dark, 
her man, stalled on a lonely road, realize his torque 

was alcohol and hatred. “Hungry for silence, I listen 
to wind, to the sound of water running down mountain, 

my own raw breath. Between the sounds, a seaborn god 
plays his reed in the caverns of my being. 

I wear his amethyst, let go my dreams: Millars, Lacewings, 
and Junebugs scatter, widen and batter the dark, 

brightening this loud dust with the fever of their eyes. 
Oh crazy itch that grabs us beyond loss 

and lets us forgive, so that we can answer birds and deer, 
lightning and rain, shadow and hurricane. 

Truth waits in the creek, cutting the winter brown hills. 
It sings with needles of ice, sings because of its scar.”


House of five fires, you never raised me. 
Those nights when the throat of the furnace 
wheezed and rattled its regular death, 
I wanted your wide door, 

your mottled air of bark and working sunlight, 
wanted your smokehole with its stars, 
and your roof curving its singing mouth above me. 
Here are the tiers once filled with sleepers, 

and their low laughter measured harmony or strife. 
Here I could wake amazed at winter, 
my breath in the draft a chain of violets. 
The house I left as a child now seems 

a shell of sobs. Each year I dream it sinister 
and dig in my heels to keep out the intruder 
banging at the back door. My eyes burn 
from cat urine under the basement stairs 

and the hall reveals a nameless hunger, 
as if without a history, I should always walk 
the cluttered streets of this hapless continent. 
Thinking it best I be wanderer, 

I rode whatever river, ignoring every zigzag, 
every spin. I’ve been a fragment, less than my name, 
shaking in a solitary landscape, 
like the last burnt leaf on an oak. 

What autumn wind told me you’d be waiting? 
House of five fires, they take you for a tomb, 
but I know better. When desolation comes, 
I’ll hide your ridgepole in my spine 

and melt into crow call, reminding my children 
that spiders near your door 
joined all the reddening blades of grass 
without oil, hasp or uranium. 

I had a little brother 
And I brought him to my mother 
And I said I want another 
Little brother for a change. 
But she said don’t be a bother 
So I took him to my father 
And I said this little bother 
Of a brother’s very strange. 
But he said one little brother 
Is exactly like another 
And every little brother 
Misbehaves a bit he said. 
So I took the little bother 
From my mother and my father 
And I put the little bother 
Of a brother back to bed.


Look at them flit Lickety-split Wiggling Swiggling Swerving Curving Hurrying Scurrying Chasing Racing Whizzing Whisking Flying Frisking Tearing around With a leap and a bound But none of them making the tiniest tiniest tiniest tiniest tiniest sound

It was the time before
I was born.
I was thin.
I was hungry. I was
only a restlessness inside a woman’s body.
 
Above us, lightning split open the sky.
Below us, wagon wheels cut land in two.
Around us were the soldiers,
young and afraid,
who did not trust us
with scissors or knives
but with needles.
 
Tear dresses they were called
because settler cotton was torn
in straight lines
like the roads we had to follow
to Oklahoma.
 
But when the cloth was torn,
it was like tears,
impossible to hold back,
and so they were called
by this other name,
for our weeping.
 
I remember the women.
Tonight they walk
out from the shadows
with black dogs,
children, the dark heavy horses,
and worn-out men.
 
They walk inside me. This blood
is a map of the road between us.
I am why they survived.
The world behind them did not close.
The world before them is still open.
All around me are my ancestors,
my unborn children.
I am the tear between them
and both sides live.


First
there was some other order of things
never spoken
but in dreams of darkest creation.
 
Then there was black earth,
lake, the face of light on water.
Then the thick forest all around
that light,
and then the human clay
whose blood we still carry
rose up in us
who remember caves with red bison
painted in their own blood,
after their kind.
 
A wildness
swam inside our mothers,
desire through closed eyes,
a new child
wearing the red, wet mask of birth,
delivered into this land
already wounded,
stolen and burned
beyond reckoning.
 
Red is this yielding land
turned inside out
by a country of hunters
with iron, flint and fire.
Red is the fear
that turns a knife back
against men, holds it at their throats,
and they cannot see the claw on the handle,
the animal hand
that haunts them
from some place inside their blood.
 
So that is hunting, birth,
and one kind of death.
Then there was medicine, the healing of wounds.
Red was the infinite fruit
of stolen bodies.
The doctors wanted to know
what invented disease
how wounds healed
from inside themselves
how life stands up in skin,
if not by magic.
 
They divined the red shadows of leeches
that swam in white bowls of water:
they believed stars
in the cup of sky.
They cut the wall of skin
to let
what was bad escape
but they were reading the story of fire
gone out
and that was a science.
 
As for the animal hand on death’s knife,
knives have as many sides
as the red father of war
who signs his name
in the blood of other men.
 
And red was the soldier
who crawled
through a ditch
of human blood in order to live.
It was the canal of his deliverance.
It is his son who lives near me.
Red is the thunder in our ears
when we meet.
Love, like creation,
is some other order of things.
 
Red is the share of fire
I have stolen
from root, hoof, fallen fruit.
And this was hunger.
 
Red is the human house
I come back to at night
swimming inside the cave of skin
that remembers bison.
In that round nation
of blood
we are all burning,
red, inseparable fires
the living have crawled
and climbed through 
in order to live
so nothing will be left
for death at the end.
 
This life in the fire, I love it.
I want it,
this life.


Will my ears grow long as Grandpa's?
What makes us look like kin?
Tell me where'd I get long eyelashes
and where'd I get my chin?
 
Where'd I get my ice cream sweet tooth
and this nose that wiggles when I talk?
Where's I get my dizzy daydreams
and my foot-rolling, side-step walk?


Did I inherit my sense of humor
and these crooked, ugly toes?
What if I balloon like Uncle Harry
and have to shave my nose?
 
How long after I start growing
until I start to shrink?
Am I going to lose my teeth,
some day?
My hair?
My mind?
 
Do you think
I'll be tall or short or thin
or bursting at the seams?
Am I naturally this crazy?
Is it something in my genes?
 
I'm more than
who I am,
I'm also
who I'm from.
It's a scary speculation--  
Who will I become?


We practiced together,
sweat and stained.
We pummeled each other 
and laughed off pain.
Teams may disagree,
may tease,
may blame.
Teams may bicker and whine,
but get down for the game.

You had my back.
We fought the fight.
And though our score
was less last night,
we're walking tall.
Our team came through
and stuck together like Crazy Glue.
I'm proud to say
I lost with you.


Gone then risen
 
Milk dawn gone then risen
 
Our ephemeral fawning done
 
Gone sanguine then risen in spell
 
High with your wrist while nihil busy
 
Unburrowing dice teams from sand figurines
 
Risen to swirl steam scooping passing seemingly
 
A kindred-ided up and up, born of dormant corners
 
Forms filial then filled          Goes mourn and swoon
 
Love have and love loom                    Union and risen


Or nothing is really north, but you’re so civic and indivisible.
 
 
The Folk Revival has no middle, no anachronism, just no more caption or advent, but you’re not them dilettantes.          As relentless as listening to the shore backwards, your words about how it happens, wanderlust and continental, badge verse the nourish of no mercy  crash short, burst slack,   repeat  as you were  reallysomething.
 
 
You know the house is empty, exempt, yours for the mentioning of will to power appears an officer on a horse with more posture than you’re used to, undoing your robe for it’s satin loose before a sash and give him the magician, night minion, answer over the flashlight    nothing
 
 
Authority I admire is kept during itself, kinetic, black market uncorrectable and in between admiring and participating, you wear the tight number which hugs risen the been-there under your eyes vindicates evasion head on    I don’t even imagine what real violation sounds    I stay at the Social Club while you go sell my high back to Cuba China   as a kind of sound of king of sound    He’ll ask me to speak up, come closer, note the kind of trouble I’m in here is absurd and prolific  the kind you catch for witnessing an author rewrite the book   skip the vista, the word vista,  the good word  and look as it’s splitting


First, night opened out.
Bodies took root from rotting salt
and seawater into evidence of red life.
Relentless waves pumped tidal air
into a single heartbeat.

In the pulp of shadow and space,
water sucked our people from sleep.
That’s how it all began. At least
that’s all we can remember to tell.
It began with water and heartbeat.

In minutes we tunneled through
corn woman’s navel into tinges 
of moist red men and women.
Yawning, we collected our chins,
knees, breasts, and sure-footed determination.

A few thousand years before
Moses parted the Red Sea, and the 
God with three heads was born in the Middle East,
the Choctaw people danced
our homeland infra red.

Finally when the stranger’s arms
reached to strangle the West,
Grandmother eavesdropped 
on the three-faced deity 
who said that chaos was coming.

When he puckered his lips and tried to kiss her
she made it rain on him.
“Maybe you’ve forgotten
you were born of water and women,”
she said, walking away laughing.


There she was standing over me. She inched her face close to my face. She put her hands on my face. I remembered her immediately, but did not speak. My eyes blurred. They were hot and heavy. It hurt to look at Ain’t Sally. It hurt to see.
     I closed my eyes. I felt her cool touch. She chanted. “You will be well. You will not die. Chim chukma taha che. You will be well. Chi pesa taha che.”
     She sang to me. Then I heard her leave.

A woman whose bed was surrounded by white partitions, moaned again. This was not a new sound. It was a constant. Her breath whistled irregularly. There was no escaping the whistle. The whistling sounds were everywhere in the white room. Then they stopped.
     Another woman in another bed called out. No answer. She pushed the bell. Women wearing white dresses came into the room. They pushed the partitions back. They said the whistling woman was dead. I went back to sleep. Before the hospital. Before rheumatic fever. Before the dead woman. I had met Ain’t Sally. I was seven years old.

Ain’t Sally was an ancient Indian relative who lived in Hayrick, outside of Dublin. A place of the Snakes. A place of memory.
     Once a base camp for nomadic tribes following buffalo, once a county seat, Hayrick, Texas took its name from a solitary mountain standing in the breadth of open grasslands. Only a state government road sign remains, marking the place of Hayrick. Marking the sign of the Snakes.
     The only time we visited Ain’t Sally, I rode in the back seat of our green 1950 Chevrolet, and listened to my Indian grandmother tell stories about our family. Chapters went like this:
     —Life in a  Dugout.
     —Making Lye Soap.
     —How Grandfather got VD.
     I don’t remember much of the drive to Hayrick. We drove the rural roads of West Texas. There were two lanes of dust and dirt, stagnant, green-belted river beds and one-lane bridges.
     When we arrived at Ain’t Sally’s the old woman ambled out of a rusted screen door of a paintless wooden house. Breasts sagging, her thin body lacking in strength seemed unable to support her weight. She wore a sleeveless dress that revealed naked brown skin, skin that was no more than a sheath for aging bones. Hairless underarms.
     She fed us saltine crackers and cold squirrel dumplings. She asked me questions. She asked me about my secrets. I don’t remember having any to tell. She told me hers while I ate.
     She said I reminded her of someone she’d seen a long time ago. I remember dancing for her. I told her I was a bird. A manbird. A hunter. I danced around the kitchen table and sang and pretended to be PowWow Dancer. A bird of dance. A bird of rhythm.

When my mother and grandmother went to town, Ain’t Sally took me for a walk around her place. The farm had belonged to her relatives. We went down to the dry gorge and she pointed out all kinds of roots and trees. She asked me if I knew about the plants of the pasture. I said yes. I thought I was lying.
     As we walked farther from the house, I remember a hot gusty wind picked up her voice like dust tendrils on bedrock and blew it away from me. I ran to catch the sound. I found Ain’t Sally sitting on a granite rock.
     —Ala Tek. Indian girl.
     —Come and see, on our land, the four winds of the old days will blow through our hair.
     Then she tugged at my black braids.
     —Come and visit the Snakes, Ala Tek.
     —When I was your age they blew across this place like red dust devils on flat neutral plains.
     —Can you see them.
     —Do you hear the Snake People calling us?

—Yes. I can see them. I hear them. They are naked and wild. Their eyes, like black grapes shining in the Sun, stare back at me.
     —They’re hungry.
    I watch the Snake People eat the fleshy intestines of my uncle’s butchered cow. I taste the hot blood, roll it around on my tongue and remember. It makes me sweat.
     I watch the Snake People play games around the carcass. And before we walk back into the house, the old woman and me, she runs her crooked fingers across my eyes and says.
     —Ala Tek. Indian Girl.
     —The ghosts of your ancestors will visit you there.

The rest of the visit blurs. My last memories are from that day. She waves to me from her front porch.
      She never explained the Snakes. She only said, “Che pisa lauchi. I’ll see you. Indians never say good-bye.”
      I never saw Ain’t Sally again until she appeared in my hospital room. I thought she was dead. I didn’t know about the Snakes until some twenty-five years later. To make the sign of the snake means:
     Comanches are here.


“Crawl in,” said the witch, “and see if it’s hot enough to put the bread in.” 
—Hansel and Gretel

All roads lead to rooms. 
—Irish Proverb
a stark 
                  Quake 

               a numb 
                  Calm 


                      * 


               clutching my Crumbl 
               ejumble 
                  among 
               Tombs and 
               in Caves 
                  my 
                Dream 
                Vision 

               Oarsman, oarsman, 
                  Where have you been? 
               I’ve been to Leafy, 
               I’ve dismembered the Queen. 

               Oarsman, oarsman 
                  What did you there? 
               I hid in a cleft, 
               I braided the air. 



hearing our oars where their freed goatsteps sped   
and are silent 
by an extinct river 
O Babylon when I lay down 
alert for sliding cataracts 
where in corridors the print of dancing feet   
beyond poise I am prey 
posing in snow-light 
being of human form 
clothed in the scales of a fish 


Count him a magician 
he controls the storm 
walked on the sea shouting   
that he is the Logos of God 
that he is the Word original and first begotten 
attended by power 
upheld by his mother 
(a very active gesturing baby)   
what if Simon Peter Jesus himself   
walked among the cold stone faces 
shouting NIKA 
emptyeyed blanksmiling 



                            Swiftness divination these false gods 
                            their commerce is the cloud 
                            so they can learn what is preparing in the sky   
                            Artificer of the universe 
                            Magician who controls the storm 
                            to see you in one spot 
                            I count the clouds others count the seasons   
                            Dreaming of archipelagos and the desert   
                            I have lived through weeks of years 
                            I have raked up fallen leaves for winter   
                            after winter across an empire of icy light 


Light of our dark is the fruit of my womb 
or night falling through the reign of splashes   
Liquid light that bathes the landscape in my figure   
Clairvoyant Ireland 
eras and eras encircled by sea 
the barrows of my ancestors have spilled their bones   
across the singing ear in hear or shell   
as wreck or wrack may be in daring   
There were giants on the earth in those days   
feasts then on hill and fort 
All night the borders of my bed 
carve paths across my face 
and I always forget to leave my address   
frightened by the way that midnight 
grips my palm and tells me that my lines   
are slipping out of question 

Divorce I manumission round 
with a gentle blow the casting branch 
my right hand My covenant 
was garment concealed or mask or matron 
Proceed with measured step   
the field and action of the law   
Like day the tables twelve   
whip torch and radiate halo   
Sky brewing coming storm   
Faraway over the hill 
when Hell was harrowed 
and earth was brought to heel   
how the hills spread away   
how the walls crumbled   
deathcolored frozen in time 
Where was the senate   zone and horizon 
Where are the people   mountain of light to the east   
Tell them I sail for the deep sea rest 
a painless extraction a joyful day   
bird of passage over all I love   
Goodbye to all the little fir trees   
of the future 

               far   off    in    the    dread 
               blindness    I   heard   light 
               eagerly   I   struck   my foot 
               against    a      stone      and 
               raised    a    din    at    the 
               sound    the   blessed    Paul 
               shut   the   door   which   had 
               been   open   and   bolted   it

All male Quincys are now dead, excepting one. 
John Wheelwright, “Gestures to the Dead”
1 
Vast oblong space 
dwindled to one solitary rock. 

On 
it I saw a heap of hay   
impressed with the form   
of a man. 

Beleaguered Captain Stork   
with his cane 

on some quixotic skirmish. 

Deserters arrived from Fort Necessity   

All hope was gone. 

Howe carrying a white flag of truce   
went toward the water. 


2 
An Apostle in white 
stood on a pavement of scarlet 

Around him 
stretched in deep sleep 

lay the dark forms of warriors. 

He was turned away   
gazing on a wide waste. 

His cry of alarm   
astonished everyone. 


3 
A Council of War   
in battle array 
after some siege. 

I ran to them   
shouting as I ran   
“Victory!” 

Night closed in   
weedy with flies. 

The Moon slid 
between moaning pines   
and tangled vines. 


4 
Neutrals collected bones 

or journeyed behind on foot 

shouting at invisible doors   

to open. 

There were guards who approached   

stealthy as linxes 

Always fresh footprints in the forest 

We closed a chasm 

then trod the ground firm 

I carried your name 

like a huge shield. 


5 
Because dreams were oracles   
agile as wild-cats 
we leapt on a raft of ice. 

Children began a wail of despair   
we carried them on our shoulders. 

A wave 
thrust our raft of ice   
against a northern shore. 

An Indian trail 
led through wood and thicket 

Light broke on the forest 

The hostile town   
was close at hand. 

We screamed our war-cry   
and rushed in. 


6 
It was Him 
Power of the Clouds   
Judge of the Dead 
The sheep on his right   
The goats on his left   
And all the angels. 

But from the book 
backward on their knees 
crawled neolithic adventurers known only to themselves.   
They blazed with artifice 
no pin, or kernel, or grain too small to pick up. 
A baby with a broken face lay on the leaves 
Hannibal—a rough looking man 
rushed by with a bundle of sticks. 
“Ah, this is fortunate,” cried Forebear 
and helped himself to me. 


7 
God is an animal figure   
Clearly headless. 
He bewitches his quarry   
with ambiguous wounds   
The wolf or poor ass   
had only stolen straw. 

O sullen Silence 
Nail two sticks together 
and tell resurrection stories. 


8 
There on the deck, child in her arms   
was the girl I had been before 

She waved 

then threw her child to me   

and jumped 

But she missed the edge and swirled away. 

I left you in a group of grownup children and went in search   
wandered sandhills snowy nights   
calling “Mother, Father” 

A Dauphin sat down to dine on dust   
alone in his field of wheat 

One war-whoop toppled a State. 

I thought we were in the right country   
but the mountains were gone. 

We saw five or six people coming toward us   

who were savages. 

Alhough my pen was leaky as a sieve   
I scribbled “Arm, Arm!” 

“Ear.” Barked the Moon. 

We paddled with hands, planks, and a pencil 

“Listen—The people surrender” 
I don’t remember the rest but it was beautiful. 

We were led ashore by Captain Snow   
“I’ll meet you soon—” he said   
and vanished in the fog. 


9 
We cooked trout and perch on forked sticks.   
Fire crackled in the forest stillness 
Fire forms stood out against the gloom   
Ancient trunks with wens and deformities   
Moss bearded ancients—and thin saplings   
The strong, the weak, the old, the young— 

Now and then some sleeper would get up 
Warm her hands at the fire 
and listen to the whisper of a leaf   
or the footfall of an animal 
I kept my gun-match burning when it rained— 


10 
Holding hands with my skin   
I walked the wintry strand.   
“Tickle yourself with my stroke” 
ticked the wiseacre clock. 

The river sang— 
“Pelucid dark and deep my waters— 
come and cross me alone.” 

The final ruins ahead 
revealed two figures timidly engraved on one another. 


11 
I built a house 
that faced the east 
I never ventured west   
for fear of murder. 

Eternity dawned. 

Solitary watcher   
of what rose 
and set 
I saw only   
a Golgotha   
of corpses. 


12 
Experience teaches   
the savage revenge 
an enemy always takes   
on forerunners 
who follow. 

You were a little army   
of unarmed children— 
A newborn infant 
sat in the hollow 
of my pillow. 


13 
The house was a model of harmony. 

Children coiled like hedgehogs   
or lay on their backs. 

A doll uttered mysterious oracles   
“Put on the kettle.”   
“Get up and go home.” 

The clock was alive   
I asked what it ate. 

“A Cross large enough to crucify us all.”   
and so on. 

Blankets congealed   
into icicles 

We practiced 
trips, falls, dives into snowdrifts. 

With a snowshoe for a shovel   
I opened the clock 

and we searched for peace in its deep and private present.   

Outside, the world swarmed with sorcerers.


I’ll take a bath when it snows,
when I can look out the window up high
and see the sky all pale
and blank like a fish’s eye.
And I know the boats won’t go out tonight,
the fishermen drinking whiskey, locked
in a bar-dream, the music rocking them deeper.
 
It doesn’t snow enough here,
though some would say otherwise,
fearing accidents. But the paper boy, skidding
uphill on his bike in light snow, knows better,
making S-tracks when his wheels slide sideways.
 
We really needed this snow, the old men will say,
putting to bed the surface roots of trees,
putting to bed the too-travelled streets.
 
When everything is covered
the earth has a light of its own;
the snow falls down from the moon
as everyone knows, and brings that light
back to us. I needed this light.
 
All day I kept by the window, watching the sky,
a prisoner in my clothes, the wind felt dry
and mean. Starlings stalked the yard with evil eyes
—I hated them, and hated, too, my neighbor’s house
where sparks from the chimney fell back in a stinking
cloud—black ashes bringing no blessing.
 
When the roads are covered,
when the water is black and snow falls
into the waves, the birds’ hunger swirls
the air, dark lovely shapes. All hungers
are equal now. I'll give them bread and seeds.
 
I have no money; the whiskey is gone,
and I must bathe in water. Fishermen, please
do not go out in your flimsy boats tonight
to chase after the cod and mackerel,
to hook the giant eels. Go safe,
go free. Let your feet leave trails
through streets and yards, wandering
home, your crooked voyages to bed.


New houses relax on the fields.
Garage doors open soundlessly
to admit the monster. Tires stretched
over forty pounds of air
pressure float across gravel.
 
The boy closes the last storm
door on the last evening
paper and runs to the car
where his mother waits. She does not
answer him; the door slam freezes
her dreams. It is January.
 
A dog chained to a barn door
keeps barking. Somebody’s angry,
scared to let him go.
On the other side
of a forest past these fields,
wolves sniff the hard snow
of the tundra. I lay beside the only
tree for warmth, there
where the pack might find me.
 
The house takes care of us now.
Look at the meat
browning under the light.
The refrigerator switches on;
ice crashes into the tray.
 
Here are locks in case someone
wants to do us harm. Remember
how the police had to pound and pound
to wake us that night a white Cadillac
leapt from the icy road
 
into the arms of our maple! It hung there,
empty, doors flung wide—
it was a great white petal of a car,
breathing under the gas-lights, opening
and opening.

Lagos you are dirty
Your sand is soiled
Your fruits pithy.
 
I am tied to you
in a strange land
by lines that queue up
for foodstuffs you
should be eating but
ship off to me here
where I stand on check
out lines and marvel
at the cost of one
paw paw, just one mango
singular, along and apart
from you my dirty city.
 
O Lagos, your streets
are packed and pollute
the air while here in
a smug smogged city
I choke.
 
Your cord cuts my throat.
I am hurt and I cry like
my Mami market mothers
who go home night after
night with the same tin pots.
Their food is rotting and
ought to be thrown out to
the birds and beasts of
the forest/ but the lines!
O God, these lines are so long
and between the houses and
the foodstuffs so many palms
must be oiled.
 
Nairas are dripping with black gold
and yet a beggar man’s lot is the
same/ He covers his shame as best
he can and little boys skip school.
A policeman holds his right hand out
a green car passes him dash. And we go
dash you dis and we go dash you dat
and mek we do business.
 
O Lagos, Lagos, ah say, you don tyah
fo dis? Yousef wey you de com fom?
Me, I long for the cleanliness of
sand roads that breathe long in carefully
spaced intervals between cars running
wild like mustangs roaming the plains.
There are no drivers to speak of.
They have vanished over the hills and
into gulleys.
 
The seeds have been planted. It is a
bitter harvest we reap. The deeds have
been done. What has been sown is the
flower of our calabashes on the eve of
harvest. If only the waters in the Marina
               If only the waves would whisper
louder the secrets of her beaches I would
know all/
 
My harbour is named after a queen whose
son’s footprints are planted like a bad
seed on the headdress of my children.
 
Lagos, lay your plans carefully. There
is no way to stop the rise of bicycles
and lorries, hopeful bodies and empty
pots. You divert dash for food, care
for business. We are not an oasis in a
dying desert/ Have we not learnt, o
Lagos, the sound of seductive songs
and sights that blind us
between need and life there must be hope/﻿


first garden

Beastgarden.



second garden

Bees go mad on late summer evenings, should
People stray from their jobs towards water

Beastgarden.



third garden

Who makes the rented red boat's
Oars turn

Who is the younger one always
Turning up

Who professes to be better because
He is just looking

Who says he is worse off as
He cannot look

Beastgarden.



fourth garden

The unicycle girl, thin
Like one with a sexual problem,
Goes through
The Schlosspark. This follows:
Father rolling his eyes

Beastgarden.



fifth garden

The man from Manchester
Has my breast in his hand

These are funny
They don't do anything do they

Being burnt by a fire I say

Beastgarden.



sixth garden

Similarly, if only
You grasped some
Titanic misery or a 
Love like an old man's

Beastgarden.



seventh garden

Where were we

A ballroom competition goes on
A yellow satin bikini
A fuchsia floor-length are
Dancing; an audience is
Drinking, clapping 1 2 3 1 2 3

Beastgarden.


The first sentence is a sentence about writing. The second sentence tells you it's alright to lose interest. You might be one of those people who sits back in his or her chair without interest, and this would have been the third sentence you would have read. The fourth sentence, what does that say, that says something about how I genuinely feel, even if it no longer matters how I genuinely feel, that has not even become the topic of another book. The fifth sentence says that that was left by the wayside because it was such a variable thing. That's what the sixth sentence said, and says, that it sits there still, varying, changing its colors, etc., the army of ancient Rome marches by, they think it is some sort of tomb and display their eagle insignia. The seventh sentence ill conceals its surprise that I should have tried to make it all look so far away. The eight sentence is therefore a meditation on something close at hand. The ninth sentence is a means of approach. In the tenth sentence I discover I am staring at a list of things I have done written in blue pencil on brown paper. In the eleventh sentence I draw a one-eyed duck on the paper beside the list. In the twelfth sentence I circle one of the numbers on the list and I start to feel nervous. In the thirteenth sentence I realize I have chosen something. In the fourteenth sentence I decide I will read my choice aloud. In the fifteenth sentence I stall by saying the words "I don't have a choice." In the sixteenth sentence I stall again by thinking about the obelisk on the Upper East Side in Central Park and how it is called "Cleopatra's Needle," and how around the base of the "needle" there are metal supports in the shape of crustaceans, I think they are crabs in fact but sometimes that word is slightly obscene so I consider not writing it. In the seventeenth sentence I think some more about the kinds of joke that employ that word and whether it is worth thinking about such jokes, as it does alter the genre of what you are writing if such things are allowed to be thought as a part of it. The lawns of the park were very green in summer, and it is early summer right now, right as I think to think this, and this is the first time I have lived in New York City for a full year in ten years, this is what I tell as the nineteenth sentence. In the twentieth sentence I recall the list and resolve again to look at it. In the twentifirst sentence I misspell twenty-first with two "i"s. In the twenty-second sentence I look down at the list, I have circled no. 18759351 on the list. In the twentisecond sentence I misspell twenty-second using an "i" again. In the twenty-third sentence I read what is written next to no. 18759351, it says, "He was sitting on a bench...," but at this moment a breeze enters in through the open window, lifting the page and you begin reading another line, the words, "And you hand in the application and it takes three months and...." In the twenty-fourth sentence you can see me set the page down as another person walks through the door. I turn off the electronic typewriter and scroll out the page and place it facedown on the desk and I cover it with a notebook you weren't aware was also there on the desk. Now you can see it, it is almost the exact same color as the surface of the desk and now you can see it. These were the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth sentences, respectively, it is the lot of the twenty-seventh sentence to have to announce that. In the twenty-eighth sentence a cloud passes over the apartment on its way into space. In the twenty-ninth sentence, I think, next year this will be the number of my age. The thirtieth sentence is all about the speed at which time is passing. In the thirty-first sentence I won't care anymore, I'll see that reality only accrues to itself and does not have to mean something. In the thirty-second sentence I want you to agree with me. Things happen by chance, and what Montaigne pleads with us to believe, in an essay, is that fortune makes herself known in the act of reading, there is much that I could not have intended which is yet here, I forget exactly how this goes, this being the thirty-third sentence. I sit down beside myself in the thirty-fourth sentence and say to myself, smiling, even small numbers are big. This is the working of time, the thirty-fifth sentence joins in saying this, too, once one has crossed the years their number does not matter. But what I was trying to get across was, I think in sentence thirty-six, that maybe you could not have done things earlier, maybe it just was not possible in those days for whichever reasons. You spend the thirty-seventh sentence attempting to spell those reasons out. You fall asleep, and in the thirty-eighth sentence you dream about a room. The room is a classroom in which you are alone, says sentence number thirty-nine, the windows have been left open and a sentence can be read on the blackboard. In the fortieth sentence you have to force yourself to go on. Descartes's dream, you remember, in sentence forty-one, provided a quote supposedly from Ausonius. This is the forty-second sentence, Est et non. Then I think it is safe to say that something begins to happen, sentence forty-three tells us. Sentence forty-four says that you should forgive. Sentence forty-five says that you remember this number as having been particularly beautiful when worn by your mother. Sentence forty-six says the figures move away. Sentence forty-seven is a sentence about what loneliness names itself in the paradoxical presence of others. Sentence forty-eight says it has a name. Sentence forty-nine says that I cannot remember this name. Sentence fifty says that I go back and try and live there in that moment when I was saying the name. I say, "Happiness." This was sentence fifty-one. That was sentence fifty-two. Sentence fifty-four is a sentence about how there is too much of so many things, there is too much of all the words, but the world runs on underneath them and I keep on imagining how you could have heard me, how you could not have heard me. Sentence fifty-five is a sentence about picking up the phone. Sentence fifty-six is a sentence about picking up a small cellular phone but not using it and willing the phone to ring on its own. The gray cotton of the sweatshirt I wear is a warm cotton in sentence fifty-seven. In sentence fifty-eight I decide to keep on saying the numbers. In sentence fifty-nine I hold the page up to the light and see the type on the other side show through, In sentence sixty you start to believe me. In sentence sixty-one I start to go back to the beginning. I wonder if I should worry. The world is full of pauses, the world is full with continuations, says sentence sixty-three. I let sentence sixty-four go. In sentence sixty-five it occurs to me that I concern myself here with something that ought not to be touched. Sentence sixty-six is a guess that this is the mystery of counting, that it goes on and means itself without having a meaning. I count the people in the distance I can see from my window in sentence sixty-seven. In sentence sixty-eight the breeze has a sweet smell. In sentence sixty-nine, it turns the last week of May in the year 2008. Sentence seventy concerns the lack of what I wanted, in my own mind, to be saying. In sentence seventy-one I'm going so far as to ask you if you can see this, how much of what I thought lay before me remained in the distance. In sentence seventy-two there is a hill there. In sentence seventy-three we see flowers open their faces and then black snakes slide down the face of the hill. In sentence seventy-four there is still nothing. In sentence seventy-five the moon changes place with the sun. In sentence seventy-six this takes place again, only now it is day. In sentence seventy-seven it is still day. In sentence seventy-eight it is still day. Why do you think about tragedy, sentence seventy-nine wants to know, since it is the least likely thing to happen. Sentence eighty will eventually come to me and want to know what I am doing with myself. Sentence eighty-one reminds me to expect this question. In sentence eighty-two something changes. I stay up two nights running and in the morning the sidewalk seems to rise up and meet my feet underneath my feet. Sentence eighty-four contains the question, didn't you already know that this would start to happen. Sentence eighty-five agrees. When I start to read sentence eighty-six I discover it contains the words, It is also true that what you said could be. For this reason, sentence eighty-seven is a sentence about why there are certainly points of correspondence between what we expect to be the case and what is. Sentence eighty-eight proclaims it feels the excitement and not the work. Sentence eighty-nine takes action without saying anything first. In sentence ninety I cover my eyes. In sentence ninety-one I uncover my eyes so that I can look again. In sentence ninety-two I cover them again. Now I am speaking to you. Now I am speaking to you. Say the words after me just as I say them. What it means to live is the subject of sentence ninety-six. You are moving out of earshot now. We are not going to miss each other. You have an excellent memory. Please never forget I was the one who told you that


Some places you could die in,
                                                if you could just go on
                                                living there.
The boy, his legs bare and small,
swinging in the stroller, sockless, suede-shoed feet touching
the runner. He can walk, but the woman
keeps him from running
into the street. He won’t obey
but listens to everything we say. Head tilted, face changing
with the conversation. Green leaves leap through fences.
Cars wait while we cross. And each bird the boy greets
with its name, “Bird,” flies away. The sky holds everything.
 
The woman pushes her son’s son along. Her arms strong enough
   to hold
nine strong horses prancing.
She’s given her money away
because someone had to bury
a child. That is the worst thing.
A mother burying her child.
 
I would never do that to her, even though it means
what it means.
A thousand years from now
when I am only a dream
I will dream this dream
of strolling.
Perhaps I am doing so now.


In the redcoat she (who is I) was
an angel, dark and bright.
 
Mama chose the drama:
pretty scarlet to subdue the white
walk, a world dumb with snow,
 
patentleather shoes to shine
the path over ice. My
 
father paid the way.
His teeth salt inside the grin.
 
I (who’s she) had a manner
of leaping toward a light
suddenly running into ecstasy
or heat, exquisitely blind
in the body racing inside it-
self. A little fit of imagining.
 
Thin arms, cropped wings,
to hold the bristly branches of fir, and sing-
ing, sisters and brothers itching,
happy from angelhair fine as a strand of cat
hair split six ways and brushed into the skin
to itch and itch again.
We were wild and giddy with gifts.
 
It was then and always as all souls itch and spin
in lit-red coats that float down this narrow vein,
so we spin in O, to someone who loves us
and suffers the world for each turn before a mirror,
quiet as ice, we fall all through at last
here in memory’s tiny Paradise.


And how terrific it is to write a radio poem 
and how terrific it is to stand on the roof and 
watch the stars go by and how terrific it is to be 
misled inside a hallway, and how terrific it is 
to be the hallway as it stands inside the house, 
and how terrific it is, shaped like a telephone, 
to be filled with scotch and stand out on the street, 
and how terrific it is to see the stars inside the radios 
and cows, and how terrific the cows are, crossing 
at night, in their unjaundiced way and moving 
through the moonlight, and how terrific the night is, 
purveyor of the bells and distant planets, and how 
terrific it is to write this poem as I sleep, to sleep 
in distant planets in my mind and cross at night the 
cows in hallways riding stars to radios at night, and 
how terrific night you are, across the bridges, into 
tunnels, into bars, and how terrific it is that you are 
this too, the fields of planetary pull, terrific, living 
on the Hudson, inside the months of spring, an 
underwater crossing for the cows in dreams, terrific, 
like the radios, the songs, the poem and the stars.


That there are things that can never be the same about
my face, the houses, or the sand, that I was born under the
sign of the sheep, that like Abraham Lincoln I am serious
but also lacking in courage,
 
That from this yard I have been composing a great speech,
that I write about myself, that it’s good to be a poet, that I look
like the drawing of a house that was pencilled by a child,
that curiously, I miss him and my mind is not upon the Pleaides,
that I love the ocean and its foam against the sky,
 
That I am sneezing like a lion in this garden that he knows
the lilies of his Nile, distant image, breakfast, a flock of birds
and sparrows from the sky,
 
That I am not the husband of Cassiopeia, that I am not
the southern fish, that I am not the last poet of civilization,
that if I want to go out for a walk and then to find myself
beneath a bank of trees, weary, that this is the life that I had,
 
That curiously I miss the sound of the rain pounding
on the roof and also all of Oakland, that I miss the sounds of
sparrows dropping from the sky, that there are sparks behind
my eyes, on the radio, and the distant sound of sand blasters,
and breakfast, and every second of it, geometric, smoke
from the chimney of the trees where I was small,
 
That in January, I met him in a bar, we went
home together, there was a lemon tree in the back yard,
and a coffee house where we stood outside and kissed,
 
That I have never been there, curiously, and that it never was
the same, the whole of the island, or the paintings of the stars,
fatherly, tied to sparrows as they drop down from the sky,
 
O rattling frame where I am, I am where there are still
these assignments in the night, to remember the texture
of the leaves on the locust trees in August, under the
moonlight, rounded, through a window in the hills,
 
That if I stay beneath the pole star in this harmony of
crickets that will sing, the bird sound on the screen,
the wide eyes of the owl form of him still in the dark,
blue, green, with shards of the Pacific,
 
That I do not know the dreams from which I have come,
sent into the world without the blessing of a kiss, behind the
willow trees, beside the darkened pansies on the deck beside
the ships, rocking, I have written this, across the back of the 
sky, wearing a small and yellow shirt, near the reptile house,
mammalian, no bigger than the herd,
 
That I wrote the history of the war waged between the
Peloponnesians and the south, that I like to run through
shopping malls, that I’ve also learned to draw, having been
driven here, like the rain is driven into things, into the
ground, beside the broken barns, by the railroad tracks,
beside the sea, I, Thucydides, having written this, having
grown up near the ocean.
﻿

Long after it was
necessary, Uncle
Vess ate the leavings
off the hog, doused
them with vinegar sauce.
He ate chewy abominations.
Then came high pressure.
Then came the little pills.
Then came the doctor
who stole Vess’s second
sight, the predication
of pig’s blood every 
fourth Sunday.
Then came the stillness
of barn earth, no more 
trembling at his step.
Then came the end
of the rib, but before 
his eyes clouded,
Uncle Vess wrote
down the gospel
of barbecue.

Chapter one:
Somebody got to die
with something at some
time or another.

Chapter two:
Don’t ever trust 
white folk to cook
your meat until
it’s done to the bone.

Chapter three:
December is the best
time for hog killing.
The meat won’t
spoil as quick.
Screams and blood
freeze over before
they hit the air.

Chapter four, Verse one:
Great Grandma Mandy
used to say food 
you was whipped
for tasted the best.

Chapter four, Verse two:
Old Master knew to lock
the ham bacon chops
away quick or the slaves
would rob him blind.
He knew a padlock
to the smokehouse
was best to prevent 
stealing, but even the
sorriest of slaves would
risk a beating for a full
belly. So Christmas time
he give his nasty
leftovers to the well
behaved. The head ears
snout tail fatback
chitlins feet ribs balls.
He thought gratitude
made a good seasoning.

Chapter five:
Unclean means dirty
means filthy means
underwear worn too
long in summertime heat.
Perfectly good food
can’t be no sin.
Maybe the little
bit of meat on ribs
makes for lean eating.
Maybe the pink flesh
is tasteless until you add
onions garlic black
pepper tomatoes
soured apple cider
but survival ain’t never been
no crime against nature
or Maker. See, stay alive
in the meantime, laugh
a little harder. Go on
and gnaw that bone clean.


Who died and made you Elvis?
      —Bumper sticker
The big rock by my door
is a plaster prop, after
all. I’m back to hear
screams for what I can’t 
do, couldn’t do forty
years ago. Awkward
pelvic thrusts fooled
the camera and virgins,
but I have no more fish-
fry tunes left to dress
up on brand new plates.
This time around,
I spend all day singing
cracked Mississippi
homilies. Why 
did I want to live
forever in the first place?
Salvation felt better dead,
floating home free
while my bones, secret
and brown, mingle
with old dirt.


   Grandma is washing me white. I am the color of hot sand in the bleached sea light. I am a stain on the porcelain, persistent as tea. Stay in the shade. Don’t say she was the only one. Cousins opposite say: you too white. I am a night-blooming flower being pried open in the morning. My skin a curtain for a cage of bones, a blackbird coop. My heart is crusty bread, hardening. Hardening. This way, I feed my own fluttering. Under shade, the day looks like evening and I cannot bear the darkness. Don’t say, I can’t stand to be touched. Say, I stare into the sun to burn off the soiled hands that print my body with bloody ink. Don’t say, Mulatto. Say, I am the horse in Oz turning different colors, each prance brightening flesh. A curiosity. Don’t say, Bathwater spiraled down into the pipes. Say, I never did fade. Say, Skin holds the perseverance of my days. Folding, folding, the water continuously gathers, making wrinkles in a map.


Eat cereal. Read the back of the box over and over. Put on my red velvet jumper with white heart shaped buttons. Walk to the bus, pick up discarded cigarette butts and pretend to smoke.
 
Get on the bus. Girls yell, Wire head, ugly black skin. Take a window seat, under the radio speaker. Look for cats hunting in the fields.
 
Go to class. Stay in at recess. Steal chewing gum, plastic green monkeys and cookies from desks. Eat in bathroom stalls. Pure white light pours in.
  
Try to get a bloody nose by punching myself in the same bathroom after lunch.
 
The teacher passes around pictures of herself pregnant. You were fat! I yell.  Everyone laughs. I lap it like licking honey from a spoon. I was pregnant, what’s your excuse? Everyone laughs. I swallow stones.
 
Grow tired in the afternoons, droop like a sunflower in the lengthening light.
 
Get on the bus. Girls yell, Brillo-head! Zebra! Sit in an aisle seat. Your father’s a nigger! I say, No, he’s a fireman. Laughter all around. Pinch myself shut like squeezing soap from a sponge.
 
Walk home. Sometimes find an unsmoked cigarette in the gravel along the curb—long, white, new. Put it to my lips, pull it away and hold it aloft, movie-star-like, all the way home.


I.

Here is a place where declarations
are made/where the heart takes precedence
the gleam goes bland
This is the heart part/intense improvisation
on the I/THOU axis
pity the poor actors (darlings)dust
in their throats (choking) dialogue ancient
(concentrated chatter dictated by clouds)

click of whispers
dammed up phrases     {mythologizing always)
Moans move through their limbs like wind through
Trees talking mad talk 'cross the illuminated
Avenues of hard cities.

II.

Take the skin
Take off the skin
Remove the vital organs one by one
especially the heart
What is left
The skeleton
The skeleton is made of calcium
magnesium, phosphorous et cetera:
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
You are holding in your arms
an amazing catalogue of chemicals
The elements clash tenderly
Sparking compounds that move like eels
Under touch.

III.

Dime falls, your voice rises (fevered)
It's keen, the way the wind whips this
Garbage up and around like a father
Swinging his baby we are holding hands
And yes, giggling no force can stop us now
We are singing all the James Brown songs
We know helpess off-key, but exhilarated
Columbus Avenue breakdown: how the puddles
In the sidewalks radiate splendor/glass
Broken against high-rise buildings beckon
We are hungry the shifting children salsa
And you may be our feast, please linger
You offer me your laughter
I take the sweat from y our cheeks and hum.

IV.

Taste like tears—sea flaked and heated—
Taste like try again and get nowhere,
Maybe, this is the sonnet that mimes itself
Sequences silent and perceptive
The "might have saids"
The stomach-eating rage
The power of conversation is in its
Possibilities of Interpretation
(here's where the mime becomes important
because the words sound so dumb)
And here's where the anxiety dance gets choreographed.
It goes like this: You turn clockwise.
I turn Counter-Clockwise. We stop, stumble
Resolve our steps. Begin again.

V.

You slipped into something dangerous
after attending to your intimate conferences
Thirsty friends forever requesting water
Or is it blood they want?            Your blood. 
Somebody's screaming. Is it me?
Here on the side street being a sideshow
For passersby. You put on your silver armor.
I have only my quaint devotion.
It is not enough.            You say
I can't eat your food, baby, but I sitll like your cooking.
Did I trip?         Did you?    That Mingus
record is still revolving. You smile
serenely.             I can barely breathe.

VI.

If I could waste myself, I'd do it here
In public. Curse your name till my tongue bled.
The same tongue that searched out the
darkest spot on your back and licked it like chocolate.
Curse your name like you were some
Broken god in need of further profaning.

But I am no good at playing: victim.
Sadness is so private. These tears on the
Uptown Express. Take that tired song off
the constant stereo. It keeps reminding me
That what brought me to you was music.
You said you never lied to me. Fucker.

You take the exit sign home with you.
But I won't become invisible.


It's all foreplay, really-this walk
through the French Quarter exploring souvenir shops,
each of them carefully deranged, as if dust were to settle
only at perfect intervals. Yes to the vetiver fan
that smells sweeter than sandalwood or cedar.
No to the mammy doll dinner bells.
No to the mammy dolls whose sewn smiles are as fixed
as the lives of too many poor Black women here:
motherhood at twelve, drugged, abandoned by fifteen,
dead by twenty (suicide, murder) so easily in Desire.
And yet, their voices sweeten the snaking air,
providing the transvestites their proper Muses,
all of whom have streets named for them in the Garden District.

A soft heat settles on Terpsichore,
just inside the gay bar where the owner's pink flamingos
complement silly songs on the rescued Rockola.
Who can dance to that Lorne Greene ballad, "Ringo"?

Dixie beer is the beer of choice; marijuana the cheapest drug.
Relaxation is key, since it's all a matter of waiting
for the right body to stumble toward you.
Lust perfumes parties in the projects, barstool chatter at the Hyatt,
lazy kissing on the median strip stretching down Tchoupitoulas.
If Professor Longhair were alive, he'd teach a lesson
in seamless motion: the perfect slide of a man's hand down a 
              woman's back;

a lesson you learned long ago before you met me. We are making love
as we did before in Austin and Manhattan.
But in this room on this costly bed our lovemaking
starts out the slowest grind, then, like this city's weather,
goes from hot to hotter, from moist to rainstorm wet.

You're tall, A., and where there should be tribal markings
there are scars-football, basketball, mid-sixties grind parties
where something always got out of hand. There's the perfect
amen. You're your own gospel.
And you bring good news to me-the way you enter me
Like grace, the way you say my name, a psalm.
No. That's not it. It's the engineer in you that
gets me. Your search for the secret line that goes
straight to the center of the earth. Deeper and deeper
you go until there's no earth left in me. And we
hum and moan a song as old as our selves gone back.

There are too many souvenirs in your eyes.
Gifts given too often, too hastily, never opened.

Outside a city sprawls its heat, seeks out every pore,
licks every moment of sweat as we shiver in this chilly room
taking each other's measure. We say good-bye again and again.
As if every kiss, every touch we make will shadow
All our celebrations.

And they do.


honey people murder mercy U.S.A.   
the milkland turn to monsters teach   
to kill to violate pull down destroy   
the weakly freedom growing fruit   
from being born 

America 

tomorrow yesterday rip rape   
exacerbate despoil disfigure   
crazy running threat the   
deadly thrall 
appall belief dispel 
the wildlife burn the breast   
the onward tongue 
the outward hand 
deform the normal rainy   
riot sunshine shelter wreck 
of darkness derogate 
delimit blank 
explode deprive 
assassinate and batten up 
like bullets fatten up 
the raving greed 
reactivate a springtime 
terrorizing 

death by men by more 
than you or I can 

STOP 


       II

They sleep who know a regulated place 
or pulse or tide or changing sky 
according to some universal   
stage direction obvious   
like shorewashed shells 

we share an afternoon of mourning   
in between no next predictable 
except for wild reversal hearse rehearsal   
bleach the blacklong lunging 
ritual of fright insanity and more 
deplorable abortion 
more and 
more


A few years back and they told me Black 
means a hole where other folks 
got brain/it was like the cells in the heads 
of Black children was out to every hour on the hour naps 
Scientists called the phenomenon the Notorious 
Jensen Lapse, remember? 
Anyway I was thinking 
about how to devise 
a test for the wise 
like a Stanford-Binet 
for the C.I.A. 
you know? 
Take Einstein 
being the most the unquestionable the outstanding 
the maximal mind of the century 
right? 
And I’m struggling against this lapse leftover 
from my Black childhood to fathom why 
anybody should say so: 
E=mc squared?
I try that on this old lady live on my block: 
She sweeping away Saturday night from the stoop 
and mad as can be because some absolute 
jackass have left a kingsize mattress where 
she have to sweep around it stains and all she 
don’t want to know nothing about in the first place 
“Mrs. Johnson!” I say, leaning on the gate 
between us: “What you think about somebody come up 
with an E equals M C 2?” 
“How you doin,” she answer me, sideways, like she don’t 
want to let on she know I ain’ 
combed my hair yet and here it is 
Sunday morning but still I have the nerve 
to be bothering serious work with these crazy 
questions about 
“E equals what you say again, dear?” 
Then I tell her, “Well 
also this same guy? I think 
he was undisputed Father of the Atom Bomb!” 
“That right.” She mumbles or grumbles, not too politely 
“And dint remember to wear socks when he put on 
his shoes!” I add on (getting desperate) 
at which point Mrs. Johnson take herself and her broom 
a very big step down the stoop away from me 
“And never did nothing for nobody in particular 
lessen it was a committee 
and 
used to say, ‘What time is it?’ 
and 
you’d say, ‘Six o’clock.’ 
and 
he’d say, ‘Day or night?’ 
and 
and he never made nobody a cup a tea 
in his whole brilliant life! 
and 
[my voice rises slightly] 
and 
he dint never boogie neither: never!” 

“Well,” say Mrs. Johnson, “Well, honey, 
I do guess 
that’s genius for you.”


My grandmother puts her feet in the sink
        of the bathroom at Sears
to wash them in the ritual washing for prayer,
wudu, 
because she has to pray in the store or miss
the mandatory prayer time for Muslims
She does it with great poise, balancing
herself with one plump matronly arm
against the automated hot-air hand dryer,
after having removed her support knee-highs
and laid them aside, folded in thirds,
and given me her purse and her packages to hold
so she can accomplish this august ritual
and get back to the ritual of shopping for housewares

Respectable Sears matrons shake their heads and frown
as they notice what my grandmother is doing,
an affront to American porcelain,
a contamination of American Standards
by something foreign and unhygienic
requiring civic action and possible use of disinfectant spray
They fluster about and flutter their hands and I can see
a clash of civilizations brewing in the Sears bathroom

My grandmother, though she speaks no English,
catches their meaning and her look in the mirror says,
I have washed my feet over Iznik tile in Istanbul
with water from the world's ancient irrigation systems
I have washed my feet in the bathhouses of Damascus
over painted bowls imported from China
among the best families of Aleppo
And if you Americans knew anything 
about civilization and cleanliness,
you'd make wider washbins, anyway
My grandmother knows one culture—the right one,

as do these matrons of the Middle West. For them,
my grandmother might as well have been squatting
in the mud over a rusty tin in vaguely tropical squalor,
Mexican or Middle Eastern, it doesn't matter which,
when she lifts her well-groomed foot and puts it over the edge. 
"You can't do that," one of the women protests,
turning to me, "Tell her she can't do that."
"We wash our feet five times a day,"
my grandmother declares hotly in Arabic.
"My feet are cleaner than their sink. 
Worried about their sink, are they? I 
should worry about my feet!"
My grandmother nudges me, "Go on, tell them."

Standing between the door and the mirror, I can see
at multiple angles, my grandmother and the other shoppers,
all of them decent and goodhearted women, diligent
in cleanliness, grooming, and decorum
Even now my grandmother, not to be rushed,
is delicately drying her pumps with tissues from her purse
For my grandmother always wears well-turned pumps
that match her purse, I think in case someone
from one of the best families of Aleppo
should run into her—here, in front of the Kenmore display

I smile at the midwestern women
as if my grandmother has just said something lovely about them
and shrug at my grandmother as if they 
had just apologized through me
No one is fooled, but I

hold the door open for everyone
and we all emerge on the sales floor
and lose ourselves in the great common ground
of housewares on markdown.


  1 Reverse the book in duration. What does that mean? I am writing to you. These notes now when it’s too late.
   2 If the cyborg you read about in bookstores is an immigrant from Mexico crossing into the U.S. beneath a floodlit court, then mine is a Punjabi-British hitchhiker on a JI visa. This is tunneling as seen from a satellite—sort of concave warp in the dirt of the line.
   3 She lives in a house with others, including animals, creating individual spaces of companionship and ardor. What happens when this domestic life grows suspect? When the grass reverts in its granular drag to the subject of architecture: the failure of a house to believe in its occupants?
   4 Mate with surfaces. Okay. Hitchhike. Okay. Make a cup of Darjeeling tea and start walking down a sidewalk in America. I saw this in a film starring George Clooney; no, Natalie Wood. The last scene is her, the gamine self, kicking off her shoes as the house explodes behind her. Perpetrating, she doesn’t flinch. Sips tea. Keeps walking. I wanted to write that. Continuance. As it related to loss. The secret pleasure of refusing to live like a normal person in a dress/with a sex drive and fingers/dreamy yet stabilized in the café of languages.
   5 I want to have sex with what I want to become. This is a statement related to women arriving in a country it would be regressive to leave. Then, writing, I was filled with a longing for—for what? George-in-the-flesh? George Clooney in Idaho, pretending to pick up hitchhikers as research for his next movie in which he plays a mild-mannered serial killer? No. A different series of acts. Tricky. For example, I’m embarrassed by this book. It makes my blood roar to think of you reading it. So intimate. A text. Then it is a document related to shame flooding the body to make it red. Who doesn’t want to heal a human body? Who doesn’t want a perfect human body? The body of my hitchhiker is, thus, inevitably female or Punjabi, fused to the production of secrets. There are no e-mails home from the e-mail café. Nothing. Phone calls, bullshitting. Sickening. I mean, what is this girl/my girl doing, there in a foreign heartland like a dog with a thumb? My Laloo, about to do it. Don’t do it, little one. Red dress. Don’t get into the car. 
   6 But then, lit up, a red wife, kind of, not really, she sets out to see things as they are. Describes a virtual countryside. Jumps a box car. Drinks domestic beer. Okay. She does it and I write it down: a damaged eye with votive filaments. (I am writing to you.) “No point in writing home.” Then what?

 1 But I was thinking today about our conversation earlier in the summer. Exhausted, you lay your head on the kitchen table and said: “But what’s the difference between a monster and a cyborg? I need something to eat. Do you have any chocolate?” Opening the fridge, I said quietly and perhaps too seriously, trying to impress you: “The monster is that being who refuses to adapt to her circumstances.” Her fate. Her body. Great Britain. You said: “So, is Laloo English or British?” I said: “She’s from London.” But the more I said London, the more it sounded like a joke. LondonLondonLondon.

   2 I was thinking today about what happens when you keep going in a car. This is something you can only do here. Wish for something. Did you ever do it? Wish you weren’t there? I want that go on, go even though it is unclear to me what happens when you get to the Panama Canal or Idaho. Hitchhiking in Idaho as a veritable child, I was taken in by a farming couple, Fatty and Daddy, a hundred miles or so outside of Boise. Fatty was rail thin, about seventy-five, and Daddy was a big man who had a reclining chair in each room and looked younger than his wife. They picked me up in their truck—I was sitting by the side of the road brushing the knots out of my hair with my fingers—and I stayed with them for five days. They said it was not the right thing for me to be in the open like that, and they took me to eat every day at a restaurant called Country Buffet. In my innocence, I had been walking on a road that led to the country compound of a KKK leader/operative, Charles Reynold. What is an operative? It is someone who is always planning a way in, like the hen-house fox with his beautifully red, bushy tail. Daddy, Fatty, and I hunkered down until Daddy’s nephew, Robert, stopped by on his way through nowhere and gave me a ride to Boise proper, where there was a bus station. I waited until Robert had gone and then I walked out to the main drag to get a cup of coffee and interview murderers. “I can take you as far as the state line.” “That would be lovely.” Obsessed, far from home with its gooseberry patches and grim professions based upon openings at Heathrow Airport or Nestle, the main employers in the dingy part of northwest London that constituted my origins, I said yes. Soft yes to the color green, which is going. 

   3 That is a tree (going) but also an ocean: a way of being saturated with color that only happens here in your country for me; for you it might happen in another place. Mine. Like Laloo, I lived for many years on an island with congested traffic flows. Thus, a juniper tree flying by the window, intensely blue, or the Atlantic Ocean, to the left, if the car has a destination to the south, such as to The Keys, is magical to me. Improbable in light of my origins. Hers. The girl in the car. I don’t know. I am writing to you, in your special writing dress made from scraps of lace as if it (the dress, the morning of writing ahead of you) is a café; as if, writing, you are hypnotizing not only the biologies of strangers and friends but also yourself. For this reason, when I think of you reading, I think of you as writing blindly. You read but you are also writing. As if my own eyes were closed, I see your white books floating in the sky above my painting of the red girl. These books are separate from my own work, here in the salt-water notebook, but they communicate with it in a nonlocal sense. Like birds. 

   4 This is pre but the notebook is after. Soaked already at the edge and foamy. Past future. Writing on the warp when dry. Pages. Entries by hand. That is the morning I woke up and walked to the Pacific Ocean, after a night in a motel in Florence, Oregon, complete with a dodgy door and the reality of pillows. The woman at the front desk was wearing a very pretty apron with purple and yellow flowers on it. An expatriate, she said exaggeratedly, oblivious to our common origin: “About four miles. You’re not going to walk, are you? Do you have an umbrella? You can’t go out like that, ducky.”

   5 I walked towards the sound of something roaring in a day, the kind of day that is like darkness but lit up, on its forested, proximal verge by gorse, which is a bright yellow flower. Citron-yellow and a kind of tin or silver roofing with holes in it. The day. Like walking in a dreamed landscape drenched with the wrong rain. Monsoon. What kind of rain is this? I recognized the immensity but not the temperature. This was monstrous: the inability to assimilate, on the level of the senses, an ordinary experience of weather. Here is the tongue, for example, constantly darting out to feel the air: what is it? Is it summer? Is it a different season? It’s a different day. That’s okay. Damaged from her travels, in some sense unsettled, enormously anxious, a girl does it anway: gets up and goes. It’s as if the day has a memory of her and not the other way around.

I learned from my mother how to love 
the living, to have plenty of vases on hand 
in case you have to rush to the hospital 
with peonies cut from the lawn, black ants 
still stuck to the buds. I learned to save jars 
large enough to hold fruit salad for a whole 
grieving household, to cube home-canned pears 
and peaches, to slice through maroon grape skins 
and flick out the sexual seeds with a knife point. 
I learned to attend viewings even if I didn’t know 
the deceased, to press the moist hands 
of the living, to look in their eyes and offer 
sympathy, as though I understood loss even then. 
I learned that whatever we say means nothing, 
what anyone will remember is that we came. 
I learned to believe I had the power to ease 
awful pains materially like an angel. 
Like a doctor, I learned to create 
from another’s suffering my own usefulness, and once 
you know how to do this, you can never refuse. 
To every house you enter, you must offer 
healing: a chocolate cake you baked yourself, 
the blessing of your voice, your chaste touch.

I wonder what I would have said 
if my dad asked me, 
"Son, do you know who cut down 
my pretty cherry tree?" 
I think I might have closed my eyes 
and thought a little bit 
about the herds of elephants 
I'd seen attacking it. 
I would have heard the rat-a-tat 
of woodpeckers, at least, 
or the raging roar of a charging boar 
or some such other beast! 
Perhaps a hippopotamus 
with nothing else to do 
had wandered through our garden 
and stopped to take a chew. 
We all know George said, 
"Father, I cannot tell a lie." 
Yet I can't help but wonder ... 
Did he really try?


October is
when night guzzles up
the orange sherbet sunset
and sends the day
to bed
before supper
            and
October is when jack-o’-lanterns
grin in the darkness
            and
            strange company crunches
across the rumple of dry leaves
to ring a doorbell.
October is
when you can be ghost,
            a witch,
                        a creature from outer space…
almost anything!
And the neighbors, fearing tricks,
            give you treats.


I'm preparing myself for an extended period of loneliness
That will begin very soon I think
I've illegally downloaded two new depressing songs
I've placed a copy of Good Morning, Midnight under my pillow for easy reference
I've printed out the tablature for every Morrissey song I know so I can sing them to myself
Alone in my room
Just a few things are needed really
To make me calm
While I figure out a simple, clean, and effective way to kill myself,
With minimal stress for the person who has to find and dispose of my body
But I'll probably never think of a way
Because I'll probably never kill myself
I'll just lie in my bed suffocating myself with my pillows
While listening to the four songs you said were your favorite
And maybe burn myself a little with the iron
On special occasions
And the next time I'm in a subway station,
I'll stand a little further on the yellow line
Or maybe the next I'm at your apartment
I'll try a little harder


accumulation of land              maintain household bear      labor of house child

cooking reserve line               belonging to                        elaborate isolation

familias implements               enemies captured in war      bearing child rearing

production heirs number         and rear household             family contains

counting herds possessions     fellow feeling crude             isolate care

family contains in germ          bearing rearing                   accumulation of land

implements of production       cooking reserve line of        the number belonging

counting possessions              heirs                                  the captured

isolated                                 household bear                  rear heirs

feeling crude                         belonging to                       fellow feeling crude

where the route of a ship bringing tax grain from the provinces is described
 
where perceived hindering—say, birds congregating on a runway
 
where the first request was for fertilizer and seeds
 
where the instruction—harness these to the benefit of your society
 
where the conscription continued
 
where boards of revenue
 
where basically, everyone had a plant job
 
where preventable diseases rampant
 
where the need is window screens and sewer covers
 
where for the good of the very few and the suffering of a great many


The Crow call this time of year the Black Cherry Moon 
when the rose hips are blood-bright, 
spattered on their overwrought stems, and the creek 
calls so clearly in words almost our own 
as we come sliding down the bank. 
Last night, we covered the gardens in plastic. 
The chickadees were back after their wide diet of summer. 
We ate the last trout, its spine curved from disease. 
So much can go wrong, I want to know 
what you will promise me as our hands reach in and in 
through the copper, the carmine leaves. 
I know you are lonely, alone with your grief 
for your parents who are not my parents, for your life, 
which, despite all, is not my life. The cherries 
are thick here, hanging in clusters, purple-black from frost. 
It started to rain and I am chilled by it. 
Each day, we promise, we will talk of our fears 
of intimacy, how we still expect to be hurt when we love. 
You bring me a coat from the back of the truck, 
but I want to stop our task now, to sit in the cab 
of the truck while the gray spills, slick with thunder. 
What if I kissed you there in depth. 
After so many years, I can misunderstand the difference 
between instinct and obligation, how my hand 
continues to grasp the stems. Keats said 
poems should come easy as leaves off the trees, 
but see how they cling and wrestle with their ties. 
And now, the sun shines. It is not this grace 
I had imagined. When Keats said poems, I meant   
love. The chokecherries roll easily 
into my palm, then fall into the plastic bag that binds 
my writs. Over and over, until we have enough, 
until our fingers are bruised with their dark juices.



Their eggs are laid on lupine. Tiny jade 
hairstreaks I could easily mistake for dew. 
Too precious. Too incidental, 
and besides that, blue, these trills that flounce 
in my potato patch, drawn 
from dryland origins to the domestic 
stain of water from my hose. 
What an old woman would study, I think 
as you hand me the guidebook, distracted 
by the replica of a parasol 
growing out of a bleached cow pie. 
The Siamese kitten with his butterfly eyes 
comes running, his mouth full 
of swallowtail, his breath smelling of borax 
and sugar I have poured 
over the ant hills in the garden. 
He is young and intent on eating poison. 
We bushwhack through Paradise, 
what is there to say except to lament 
the daily evidence of its passing. 
How the common blues scatter from my shade. 
And you, so fragile, so sick, so thin, 
your diet restricted, keep pointing out 
the bearded face of larkspur. 
When the angels fell, a fifteenth-centruy bishop says, 
there were 133, 306, 668 of them. 
It takes us all afternoon to cross the field. 
The body, it is so sad what happens to it. 
If you fell, you would dry up instantly. 
But these are not angel wings 
who disguise themselves as leaf or shred of bark, 
who are named after the stops 
in meaning our language must make room for: 
the comma whose wings look battered, 
or the violet underside of the question mark.
To keep the mind from clenching, you say, 
is the main thing. Even the most 
beautiful days always seem to have death in them. 
As Valentinus said; our fall into love and sleep. 
You especially like the dark alpines 
with their furred bodies and lack of marking. 
And the sulphurs, yellowed scraps that fall 
from a myth of origin that doesn’t include us. 
When we find them, we will wonder 
who is still alive. We speak of our souls with such 
surface ease. But who will take such care for us? 
You bend and bend to the scrappy blue sea, 
your back turned to the moon fluttering above you. 
I have been thinking so much of strength 
this week, yours and mine, I mean, 
the field of attention that can be strengthened.

1.

It unfolds and ripples like a banner, downward.  All the stories 
come folding out.  The smells and flowers begin to come back, as
the tapestry is brightly colored and brocaded.  Rabbits and violets.

Who asked you to come over?  She got her foot in the door and
would not remove it, elbowing and talking swiftly.  Gas leak?
that sounds like a very existential position; perhaps you had
better check with the landlord.

                                                            This was no better than the
predicament I had just read about.  Now it was actually changing
before my eyes.  Sometimes it will come to a standstill though,
and finally the reflection can begin.

Selfless—that was the proposition.  Smiling and moving instantly
there was no other purpose than that which brought them there,
to be in a particular place.


2.

This time the mule gave its face away.  Take your cadillac
where you want to go in the morning, convertible as it might be,
and enjoy a good bottle of rum.

Running on this way she used various modes of expression that
were current.  Nothing seemed to bring the woods any closer.
What Woods, she was questioned, realizing that as far as the 
woods went, they were largely inhabitable through the facility
of her mind.  At the Philadelphia Flower Show, an ideal situation
was built up.  Here through various regulated artificial conditions,
spring grass, waterfalls, the newly-sprouted bulbs completed
her ideal concept of nature.  The smell was overpowering.

All right then.  She had a thing about nature, from flower
show glamor and enormous greenhouses the rich cultivated.

A beauty of cultivation—in living?  Hastiness did not prevent
her from rising quick and ready to misnomers and other odd
conclusions, throwing the telephone book to the floor, “OH OH
the life I am entangled in.”  Four sides of it.

                                                                                        Above was a paradisical
level, incompleted.  With working possibilities.

Below, endless preoccupations and variations were possible.
Currently in vogue were shelves, the vacuum cleaner, a new
bedspread and color scheme for pillows.

                                                                               Taste treats were
unresponsive.  Glamor do’s were out.  Conversation was nil.
Languid

she could not even find a place to languish upon that was
fulfilling in its own way.

                            So out of the lifelessness that was around her,
the grape leaves drying out, and even though the avocado was
sprouting,

she thought, Why not fantasy?  Tugging at this character and
that, trying to push a little life in a prince or a charmer, a half-
blind bat, dryad, the works of the story teller.  Here the four
walls of the room and ceiling became apparent again.  “I ought
to tighten down and make sure I say exactly what I mean.”

And her face took on a tight pinched expression, and thrifty scotch
economy gave her shrewd eyes in the prescribed way.  Use every
tidbit, usefully.  Once upon a time there was a princess who
had a long white fur coat with a high fluffy collar, and inside the
coat were stitched beautiful butterflies in many bright colors.
The princess languished.  She was not sure where to sit to her best
advantage to enjoy herself the most.  She could not go in her mind 
or out.  She looked at her long white hand, I am the Queen of the
High Mountain Hag, she murmured to herself, still knowing she was
a princess.  She lay down upon the floor as if it were the garden of
eden, the coat spread around her.

                                                                No, that poor little house she
had built was a bore.  It’s better that it go up in flames, as it did.

She went down to Grand Central Station and gave away flowers.
Some people took them and some people didn’t.


3.

I’m glad to get back.  I had to repeat a rough discontinuous journey.
Questioning myself all along the way.  Was I jumping on her because
her time had come to an end.  Indeed I pounded on his arm all night,
over his concern for this soft-spoken individual, I can see nothing
but their softness.  Me ME, and the time we might spend together,
reading and talking, to tear away that putrid husk.

My flippancy is gone.  Now I have started my secret life again,
in transition, reminding.  As the moth reminds, its feeble antenna
groping, taken like a stalk of fern, coins of money.

All over I was shaking as the fear and tension made itself apparent.
It was a cold night out.  It was colder still between the airy gaps,
between blankets.

                                     You can see she is thoughtful
as she draws the string to the bow.  Where to go indeed.  The
point is brought forward and discussed very cleverly.

A sleeping angel or a sleeping troll?  I was rather proud of being
used, pushing the clothing hampers up and down the downtown
street.  Here, pleasant mentors conveyed their anxious solicitations,
drawing from their bags, long lists of memorandum due, what I owed.
It was a lot, if I hesitated.  I choose to go on, saying this is the
way I go, owing nothing, being that kind of person.  Hung up?

That thought intrudes as the clearly marked vista is not so clearly
marked.  Certainly one supposes in all honesty, that an essential
core of feeling blooms in each encounter.  Lost under the weight
of the garbage of who are you that you are not making apparent.
Thus unhappy, I don’t want it to be this way, and so forth.
Not costumes, or paraphernalia, the immediate reactions.


4.

We of course are in a family situation.  Anything I wish might
happen, but the larger situations are not real, not to be
considered possible, discussable as to what sense of reality
they possessed.

In the snow, the wood piled up underneath.  Oh those drifting
sensibilities.  At this point it is scarcely believable that people
gather and like each other.  Eating chocolate pudding, getting
in touch with some other sense of alikeness.  The form is no
longer obvious to me.  Whether they meander or are joined together
in their senses in the mechanics or regular grooves they run along.

                                                     I suspect that in this house, this
place that is musty and left as it was some years ago, there is
no real fear; the objects are old and I am not familiar with them,
only the sense that the Ghost or spirit world strikes you with
its familiarity, pleasurable fear.

                                                           Here the familiar
is apt to make its presence known, at any moment the unexpected
lurk in the hall, into the room.  Pieces of leather, old silken fans
laid upon the table top, rooms filled with something left unexpectedly
terror is the wrong combination of ignorance.  It contains its own
self with dusty fragments of velvet and fringe.  100 pieces of voice
with no name, called it myself, as they spoke all day, sucking the
soft slush, admitting their real deficiencies as—
I am never sure; Oh it’s that power

and disease of believing in the stale that doesn’t demand a real 
climate, takes its capacity when the demons come down.


5.

The night passes in night time.  The head moving to the shoulder,
the head rising with a frown.

In a firm voice, it doesn’t matter if the hair is flying from undue
spring breezes, the self has been raptured on the wine that produces
appropriate madness, and sad she says, my dear the bacchanal is a
lovely way to be rid of waste.

However, in seeing the house more manageable, one cannot even have
fear larger than the unknown portions of the continent which
refuses to sink. 

                                                                                  There once was a woman
who grew older, not that she minded, but the passage of time was
always constant.  Why does one have to contend with that she said, 
puzzled, as she got carried along, and constantly had to think up
new coping modes of behavior.  If he behaved to me thus when he was
40, now that I am 30, I can hardly behave like that to those that are
20, and so forth.  There wasn’t any model except the one she built,
and one could scarcely believe there was no established pattern.  This
offered wonderful possibilities, but also indecision and gutlessness.


6.

You can’t see them, all bundled up, all those that choose
to move other than where the distance seems appealing.  Knowledge
has no depth.  There isn’t any message to be spoken.

Wrangling, she speaks ill-advised my dear, as the cat has no
point in laying its head down.  She ought to watch carefully.

                                                                             The claws.  It could be
the bent hands, as they grow, that as the fur impeaches the
rose, doesn’t make the thing she hangs her body on any realer.
What could it be all about?  The necessity to follow, balancing,
contemplating words, as the basis of why we move at all.

Just a little touch.  The leader cautioned further progression.
I could hardly listen to the music for long.  Now there
seemed to be interruptions, pleasurable interludes, nothing
definite, of a fragmented nature.

                                                               Certainly I wished the best
for all.  The sadder soldiers stumbled idly, as I also in the
profound reaches of my slumber noted the elegant turns, the
twisting statements grooving into the language building something
to listen to.  The dress made from silk.  Trusting was awkward
and not of a nature to ease any further building.  Whosoever
you revere will come back tenfold upon you and lighten the
burden carried as those who desire the warmth and necessity of
communication.


7.

I am sure my dreams must have been of the wrong sort.  However, as
dreams are reflections of inner dilemmas, how did those arise, from
a day of relaxation and summer enjoyment of the fund.

Knowledge comes from what purported strike?  From that which cleanses,
and let us knot say “heart” but tissue.  Hopefully and helpfully I have
built up a language in which to talk myself to sleep.  Not for purposes
of letting in the cold.

                                         However, I have found that not all blockaded
against is the cold, the dreary reign of the dead, etc., and tasteless
realm of the mushroom.  As much can be denied as the bilious sun
strives to cause an enlargement of singing in the back of the neck and
the head.  That is uncorraled ecstasy.  I call it enthusiasm, free energy.
But it has no place to land, it is bursting and unfocused; it is a real force
and the counterpart of the gloomy depths.

                                                                              As the pieces of the house
ooze sap, blossoms and green twigs burst from the cracks.  Whether or
not to join in what I was half committed to see and do.


8.

At this point, when Jack picked up the pussy willow branches, I said
they can’t possibly be ours for the taking, and smiled with dedication
to an older Con Edison man.  The buildings were like the unexplored
garbage in my mind, fascinating and dirty, pulling pieces of cloth
from boxes left overnight.  Energy as limitless possibility, in
the attempt to transmit non-energy situations.

For example, if once I stop to realize what little gets through, I am
much more interested in the cover than the contents; it is difficult
to find any interest in anything.  Good energy displaces bad karma.
And other non entities like that sort, producing flow that in its own
place has a good bed, stocked well with what can be called fleet-footed
fishes, and approaching places of investigation, such as relations
between.

                    As I saw the blood flow to the surface of his skin, I 
forgot to watch for the telltale visions that again might come from
something I have never seen; more possibly the components of what
every man views.  If this was a possibility, the rays from every person
converging pass through the state of shock to numbness to unity without
any mind at all, for this horror fits the cat on the stairs, between
the fifth and sixth rung.  This is the way people glow and pulse similar
to an inlet of jellyfish blocking the way, full of human life; until
I who will name myself a swimmer come along and refuse to be
blocked on the way, although I turn back gladly, and will again swim
through for it is possible they do not kill, the sting’s compounded measure
is fear, and thus one not need join the broad expanse of human mouths
calling people to join their ranks to comfort their newfound recognition
or orifices, stomachs and legs.

I reminded myself twice there were several stories that kept continuing
themselves.  She ignored her face, blotched and red upon times, but
fuller.  Did you forget to wax and wane?  Her head was full of energy
brought forward and positively that what was said would turn the obvious
into color, but no sense.  Sense was for the thinkers.  Here the thinkers
forgot their word orders or sense; it was better to give them coffee,
and those off worse could smoke.

                                                                                          I had felt very
foolish when I leaned forward and grasped his hand, with effort, and
his cloak slipped down over one shoulder as he shouted, which is the
way.  And I followed for certainly no one would follow me.  As the day
is cold and colder, and what comes out of the head is of its own sort and
nature.  These words, like Nature, and Head, Thinking and Words,
repeat themselves, as the lines of landscape, attics and other closed-off
sections have reprimanded themselves by repetition.  Light

was such an enormous possibility.  Taking sight into a frenzy, it was
possible that just to look was full of excitement and wonder, for 
ages at a time, things appeared as beautiful, the sky, the street
where cars had gone by.

                                                  I worried about certain characters: ones
that never seemed to be other than puzzles to me but I was drawn to
them with certainty only because there seemed to be no understanding?
As when the mysteries were performed, the house then itself became
distilled with reason as the pots and pans were used apparently filled
with the stuff of continuity.  The sorrow that each day sinks into the
infertile other side of day, where voice comes out of the dark, and
does its rituals.  Memory has its own screen across the room to view
itself, and the continuous dwelling of conjecture takes permanent form
in stiff-legged walks to remind, thus on and on the breathing goes.



She wants a house full of cups and the ghosts
of last century’s lesbians; I want a spotless
apartment, a fast computer.  She wants a woodstove,
three cords of ash, an axe; I want
a clean gas flame.  She wants a row of jars:
oats, coriander, thick green oil;
I want nothing to store.  She wants pomanders,
linens, baby quilts, scrapbooks.  She wants Wellesley
reunions.  I want gleaming floorboards, the river’s
reflection.  She wants shrimp and sweat and salt;
she wants chocolate.  I want a raku bowl,
steam rising from rice.  She wants goats,
chickens, children.  Feeding and weeping.  I want
wind from the river freshening cleared rooms.
She wants birthdays, theaters, flags, peonies.
I want words like lasers.  She wants a mother’s
tenderness.  Touch ancient as the river.
I want a woman’s wit swift as a fox.
She’s in her city, meeting
her deadline; I’m in my mill village out late
with the dog, listening to the pinging wind bells, thinking
of the twelve years of wanting, apart and together.
We’ve kissed all weekend; we want
to drive the hundred miles and try it again.

I
 
Students, look at this table
And now when you see a man six feet tall
You can call him a fathom.
 
Likewise, students when yes and you do that and other stuff
Likewise too the shoe falls upon the sun
And the alphabet is full of blood
And when you knock upon a sentence in the 
Process of explication you are going to need a lot of rags
 
Likewise, hello and goodbye.
 
 
   II
 
Nick Algiers is my student
And he sits there in a heap in front of me thinking of suicide
And so, I am the one in front of him
And I dance around him in a circle and light him on fire
And with his face on fire, I am suddenly ashamed.
 
Likewise the distance between us then
Is the knife that is not marriage.
 
 
   III
 
Students, I can’t lie, I’d rather be doing something else, I guess
Like making love or writing a poem
Or drinking wine on a tropical island
With a handsome boy who wants to hold me all night.
 
I can’t lie that dreams are ridiculous.
And in dreaming myself upon the moon
I have made the moon my home and no one
Can ever get to me to hit me or kiss my lips.
 
And as my bridegroom comes and takes me away from you
You all ask me what is wrong and I say it is
That I will never win.


I wanted to tell the veterinary assistant about the cat video Jason sent me
But I resisted for fear she'd think it strange
I am very lonely
Yesterday my boyfriend called me, drunk again
And interspersed between ringing tears and clinginess
He screamed at me with a kind of bitterness
No other human had before to my ears
And told me that I was no good
Well maybe he didn't mean that
But that is what I heard
When he told me my life was not worthwhile
And my life's work the work of the elite.
I say I want to save the world but really
I want to write poems all day
I want to rise, write poems, go to sleep,
Write poems in my sleep
Make my dreams poems
Make my body a poem with beautiful clothes
I want my face to be a poem
I have just learned how to apply
Eyeliner to the corners of my eyes to make them appear wide
There is a romantic abandon in me always
I want to feel the dread for others
I can feel it through song
Only through song am I able to sum up so many words into a few
Like when he said I am no good
I am no good
Goodness is not the point anymore
Holding on to things
Now that's the point

This trace, if it exists, is alms for delusion. 
An arch uncurls from the floor 
scented with the scent of a tapestry, housed here. 
I recall the hour but not its passage 
unless dream captures and ties it to sleep: 
a fat bellhop smiles, shows me to the tower 
where I can watch the departure. 
But some days settle so that nothing 
crosses the horizon; stare as I will, no star 
needles the air. Now I am left 
on the outskirts of a forest hemmed in by wheat 
where plump trees hide the image, its symmetry 
shot up and blown across the ground like feathers. 
The unicorn, the grail, blue and red wings 
of kneeling musicians, these are embroidered 
elsewhere. Perseverance was crowned. 
Hope and Pity prayed for success. 
How fast is this camera? Can it record a trace? 
There was a voyage. Four mounted horses 
strain against centuries. 
To each is allotted: dust kicked up, smoke, plumage. 



When you’re cold—November, the streets icy and everyone you pass
homeless, Goodwill coats and Hefty bags torn up to make ponchos—
someone is always at the pay phone, hunched over the receiver

spewing winter’s germs, swollen lipped, face chapped, making the last
tired connection of the day. You keep walking to keep the cold
at bay, too cold to wait for the bus, too depressing the thought

of entering that blue light, the chilled eyes watching you decide
which seat to take: the man with one leg, his crutches bumping
the smudged window glass, the woman with her purse clutched

to her breasts like a dead child, the boy, pimpled, morose, his head
shorn, a swastika carved into the stubble, staring you down.
So you walk into the cold you know: the wind, indifferent blade,

familiar, the gold leaves heaped along the gutters. You have
a home, a house with gas heat, a toilet that flushes. You have
a credit card, cash. You could take a taxi if one would show up.

You can feel it now: why people become Republicans: Get that dog
off the street. Remove that spit and graffiti. Arrest those people huddled
on the steps of the church. If it weren’t for them you could believe in god,

in freedom, the bus would appear and open its doors, the driver dressed
in his tan uniform, pants legs creased, dapper hat: Hello Miss, watch
your step now. But you’re not a Republican. You’re only tired, hungry,

you want out of the cold. So you give up, walk back, step into line behind
the grubby vet who hides a bag of wine under his pea coat, holds out
his grimy 85 cents, takes each step slow as he pleases, releases his coins

into the box and waits as they chink down the chute, stakes out a seat
in the back and eases his body into the stained vinyl to dream
as the chips of shrapnel in his knee warm up and his good leg

flops into the aisle. And you’ll doze off, too, in a while, next to the girl
who can’t sit still, who listens to her Walkman and taps her boots
to a rhythm you can’t hear, but you can see it—when she bops

her head and her hands do a jive in the air—you can feel it
as the bus rolls on, stopping at each red light in a long wheeze,
jerking and idling, rumbling up and lurching off again.

The slate black sky. The middle step
of the back porch. And long ago

my mother’s necklace, the beads
rolling north and south. Broken

the rose stem, water into drops, glass
knobs on the bedroom door. Last summer’s

pot of parsley and mint, white roots
shooting like streamers through the cracks.

Years ago the cat’s tail, the bird bath,
the car hood’s rusted latch. Broken

little finger on my right hand at birth—
I was pulled out too fast. What hasn’t 

been rent, divided, split? Broken
the days into nights, the night sky

into stars, the stars into patterns
I make up as I trace them

with a broken-off blade
of grass. Possible, unthinkable,

the cricket’s tiny back as I lie
on the lawn in the dark, my heart

a blue cup fallen from someone’s hands.



My mother the hard boned
Chinese woman 23 years
in this country
without bothering to learn
its language
buys lean pork ribs
special order
at the Hop Sang in Chinatown
and cooks dinner
for an extended family
of twenty-five during holidays.

Seated loosely around 
the dining table 
trying to eat quietly 
I am scrubbed down 
to skin and bone, 
her oldest daughter— 
spineless, a headless snake 
a woman grandfather says 
who should have her tendons 
lifted out slowly 
by the steel point 
of a darning needle 
until she writhes.

To my mother
I'm useless
but dangerous,
capable of swallowing
the family whole
into my pelvis
while I sit
waiting for the boyfriend
white and forbidden
to touch our doorbell.


In a fish cleaning station near the equator,
off the coast of Africa, summer stretches
over the barracudas, their long mirrored-chrome
bodies heaped like eel fillets, slung jaws gaping,
red canine teeth exposed as if they still crave
meat and muscle. Even dead, they are a melancholy fish,
never satisfied, always wanting to bite off
more than they can chew, their curious white eyes
in a lidless showdown with an existence
beyond the visible. Maybe they are the spawn
of the serpent who prowled and tempted Eve,
cast into the saltwater. They are terrifying and defiant,
their pointed heads hammering towards the light,
waiting for the first sign of weakness. The fishermen
catch them hovering just beneath the surface.
What is it like to die with your eyes wide open
in the bright sun?


Even if you didn’t have green eyes (in the bathtub, blue).
Even if you didn’t have a lovely singing voice,
            or care for Alexandrine champagne
            some slow Saturday evenings to sing it through,
it pleases me, your lips close to my ear,
            or when you’re a big girl, and I’m a big girl too.
 
Five years difference between we two.
Sometimes it hardly matters. I’ve decided to worship you,
            Diana, goddess of the forest—
            or is she the one of the hunt?
            Who cares? You remind me of her
too. Some woman caught me up, breathless, in her strong arms,
            said breathe, darling. Her eyes were green-blue.
 
Vague resemblances: that’s the daily news.
Meaning: I’m willingly a fool for you
            any hour past midnight,
            and almost anytime in three-quarter view.
            Consider this, too: stumbling back, after a fight,
to someplace we could call home, you and I have been known
            to duet a jubilee so funky it sounds like the blues.
 
What steady arrows you shoot, Diana, become
a goddess of the hearth: you whisper
            time to put the porchlight on,
            and we do. Who am I talking to?
What is this strange glare, this prescience that you won’t be true?
Sometimes you say something like even so, boo,
and it sounds like breathe, darling. That’s why this one’s for you.


All my stories are about being left,
all yours about leaving. So we should have known.
Should have known to leave well enough alone;
we knew, and we didn’t. You said let’s put
our cards on the table, your card
was your body, the table my bed, where we didn’t
get till 4 am, so tired from wanting
what we shouldn’t that when we finally found our heads,
we’d lost our minds. Love,I wanted to call you
so fast. But so slow you could taste each
letter licked into your particular and rose-like ear.
L, love, for let’s wait. O, for oh no, let’s not. V
for the precious v between your deep breasts
(and the virtue of your fingers
in the voluptuous center of me.)
 
Okay, E for enough.
 
Dawn broke, or shattered. Once we’ve made
the promises, it’s hard to add the prefix if. . . .
But not so wrong to try.
That means taking a lot of walks,
which neither of us is good at,
for different reasons, and nights up till 2
arguing whose reasons are better.
Time and numbers count a lot in this. 13
years my marriage. 5 years you my friend.
4th of July weekend when something that begins
in mist, by mistake (whose?), means too much
has to end. I think we need an abacus to get our love
on course, and one of us to oil the shining rods
so we can keep the crazy beads clicking,
clicking. It wasn’t a question
of a perfect fit. Theoretically,
it should be enough to say I left a man
for a woman (90% of the world is content
to leave it at that. Oh, lazy world) and when the woman
lost her nerve, I left
for greater concerns: when words like autonomy
were useful, I used them, I confess. So I get
what I deserve: a studio apartment he paid the rent on;
bookshelves up to the ceiling she drove
the screws for. And a skylight I sleep alone
beneath, and two shiny quarters in my pocket
to call one, then the other, or to call one
 
twice. Once, twice, I threatened to leave him—
remember? Now that I’ve done it, he says
he doesn’t. I’m in a phonebooth at the corner of Bank
and Greenwich; not a booth, exactly,
but two sheets of glass to shiver between.
This is called being street-smart: dialing
a number that you know won’t be answered,
but the message you leave leaves proof that you tried.
And this, my two dearly beloveds, is this called
hedging your bets? I fish out my other
coin, turn it over in my fingers, press
it into the slot. Hold it there. Let it drop.


How awkward when playing with glue 
To suddenly find out that you 
    Have stuck nice and tight 
    Your left hand to your right 
In a permanent how-do-you-do!

because it has no pure products 

because the Pacific Ocean sweeps along the coastline 
because the water of the ocean is cold 
and because land is better than ocean 

because I say we rather than they 

because I live in California 
I have eaten fresh artichokes 
and jacaranda bloom in April and May 

because my senses have caught up with my body 
my breath with the air it swallows 
my hunger with my mouth 

because I walk barefoot in my house 

because I have nursed my son at my breast 
because he is a strong American boy 
because I have seen his eyes redden when he is asked who he is 
because he answers I don’t know 

because to have a son is to have a country 
because my son will bury me here 
because countries are in our blood and we bleed them 

because it is late and too late to change my mind 
because it is time.


All these great barns out here in the outskirts,
black creosote boards knee-deep in the bluegrass.
They look so beautifully abandoned, even in use.
You say they look like arks after the sea’s
dried up, I say they look like pirate ships,
and I think of that walk in the valley where
J said, You don’t believe in God? And I said,
No. I believe in this connection we all have
to nature, to each other, to the universe.
And she said, Yeah, God. And how we stood there,
low beasts among the white oaks, Spanish moss,
and spider webs, obsidian shards stuck in our pockets,
woodpecker flurry, and I refused to call it so.
So instead, we looked up at the unruly sky,
its clouds in simple animal shapes we could name
though we knew they were really just clouds—
disorderly, and marvelous, and ours.


The burnt church up the street yawns to the sky, 
its empty windows edged in soot, its portals 
boarded up and slathered with graffiti, 
oily layers, urgent but illegible.
All that can be plundered has been, all 
but the carapace—the hollow bell tower, 
the fieldstone box that once served as a nave. 
The tidy row of homes that line this block 
have tended lawns and scalloped bathtub shrines. 
Each front porch holds a chair where no one sits. 
Those who live here triple lock their doors 
day and night. Some mornings they step out 
to find a smoking car stripped to its skeleton 
abandoned at the curb. Most afternoons 
the street is still but for a mourning dove 
and gangs of pigeons picking through the grass. 
Our Lady of Perpetual Help is gray, 
a dead incisor in a wary smile. 
A crevice in her wall allows a glimpse 
into the chancel, where a sodden mattress 
and dirty blanket indicate that someone 
finds this place a sanctuary still, 
takes his rest here, held and held apart 
from passers by, their cruelties and their kindnesses, 
watched over by the night’s blind congregation, 
by the blank eyes of a concrete saint.﻿


The worst for him was his friend turned wolf,
and the blood that splattered as he ran. The worst
for us: the hospital, his upper lip tugged back
to show the gash—the flesh halved deeply,
cleanly—while I hold him for the needle
that rubs pain out. He submits
to the quick stitch, the thread black
against pink skin, calm now he sees
the doctor can be trusted, his voice
soothing, his face clean shaven,
the clues that signal kindness to a child.
He’s worried, though, about his pet
who didn’t mean it, Mom. His voice is flat.
He knows the months he’s tried to woo this dog
were over when it leapt for his throat
and caught his mouth. The scars, at least,
will be invisible. At home, he’ll sleep,
big boy between his parents, till he’s sure
no beast will tear into his dreams. And we
will want him there, our bodies makeshift walls.
We who led the stranger to our home,
fixed him a bowl, taught him to sleep
under our blankets, we who taught our son
to rub the muzzle that sheathes the teeth.

I slid the white louvers shut so I could stand in your closet 
a little while among the throng of flowered dresses 
you hadn’t worn in years, and touch the creases 
on each of their sleeves that smelled of forgiveness
and even though you would still be alive a few more days 
I knew they were ready to let themselves be 
packed into liquor store boxes simply 
because you had asked that of them,
and dropped at the door of the Salvation Army 
without having noticed me 
wrapping my arms around so many at once 
that one slipped a big padded shoulder off of its hanger 
as if to return the embrace.


You are beadwork woven by a broken Indian woman
That I mend with cautious, needle-pricked fingers.
You are raw sweetness of burning chaga
Scraping my lungs and startling tears.
You are the bear claw necklace
No longer caressing
The space between my breasts.
You are cigarettes
That I quit years ago,
But sometimes smoke anyways.

You are maple syrup on snow
Melting on my tongue
Until I ache from the cold.
You are the cedar tree
Sheltering my childhood
From unwanted caresses.
You are the star blanket
Sliding off the bed on autumnal nights.
You are a stubborn braid of wiingashk
That must be relit with a dozen matches
Before it releases thin streamers of sweetness.

You are the love song
Played on a reedless flute
That only spirits hear.


I have made love with Pablo Neruda
On the heights of Machu Picchu
I flashed the tattoo on my thigh 
And hitched a lowride with Luis Rodriguez
I have held Adrian Louis close
And danced a wild reservation two-step
Until beer cans and disposable diapers
Spun around us like stars.
I have surrendered to Leonel Rugama’s
Burning adolescent heat
And caressed Roque Dalton
From a luxuriance of bed sheets and red wine.

I stayed up all night reading Sherman Alexie,
Nine months later, I gave birth to twin poems.

This lust is not heterosexual.
I devour Nikki Giovanni and Patricia Smith
Like Sao Tome chocolate.
I have been known to steal away for
An afternoon tryst with Julia de Burgos.
I wrap Nellie Wong around me like a silk robe.

Tonight, I have a date to share a steamy bath
With Linda Hogan and Joy Harjo
And it’s gonna be gooooood . . .

The maple syrup's full of ants.
                                    A mouse is creeping on the shelf.
                                   
                                   Is that a spider on your back?
             I ate a whole pie by myself.

The kitchen sink just overflowed.
                                   A flash flood washed away the school.
             I threw your blanket in the trash.

                                   I never lie————I————
                                                                                APRIL FOOL!

Leaves drift from the cemetery oaks onto late grass,   
Sun-singed, smelling like straw, the insides of old barns.   
The stone angel's prayer is uninterrupted by the sleeping   
Vagrant at her feet, the lone squirrel, furtive amid the litter.   

Someone once said my great-grandmother, on the day she died,   
rose from her bed where she had lain, paralyzed and mute   
For two years following a stroke, and dressed herself—the good   
Sunday dress of black crepe, cotton stockings, sensible, lace-up shoes.   

I imagine her coiling her long white braid in the silent house,   
Lying back down on top of the quilt and folding her hands,   
Satisfied.   I imagine her born-again daughters, brought up    
In that tent-revival religion, called in from kitchens and fields   
To stand dismayed by her bed like the sisters of Lazarus,   
Waiting for her to breathe, to rise again and tell them what to do.   

Here, no cross escapes the erosion of age, no voice breaks   
The silence; the only certainty in the crow's flight   
Or the sun's measured descent is the coming of winter.   
Even the angel's outstretched arms offer only a formulated   
Grace, her blind blessings as indiscriminate as acorns,   
Falling on each of us, the departed and the leaving.


I 
Is the total black, being spoken 
From the earth's inside. 
There are many kinds of open. 
How a diamond comes into a knot of flame   
How a sound comes into a word, coloured   
By who pays what for speaking. 

Some words are open 
Like a diamond on glass windows 
Singing out within the crash of passing sun 
Then there are words like stapled wagers 
In a perforated book—buy and sign and tear apart— 
And come whatever wills all chances 
The stub remains 
An ill-pulled tooth with a ragged edge. 
Some words live in my throat 
Breeding like adders. Others know sun 
Seeking like gypsies over my tongue 
To explode through my lips 
Like young sparrows bursting from shell. 
Some words 
Bedevil me. 

Love is a word another kind of open— 
As a diamond comes into a knot of flame 
I am black because I come from the earth's inside   
Take my word for jewel in your open light.


My mother had two faces and a frying pot   
where she cooked up her daughters 
into girls 
before she fixed our dinner. 
My mother had two faces 
and a broken pot 
where she hid out a perfect daughter   
who was not me 
I am the sun and moon and forever hungry   
for her eyes. 

I bear two women upon my back   
one dark and rich and hidden 
in the ivory hungers of the other   
mother 
pale as a witch 
yet steady and familiar 
brings me bread and terror 
in my sleep 
her breasts are huge exciting anchors   
in the midnight storm. 

All this has been 
before 
in my mother's bed 
time has no sense 
I have no brothers 
and my sisters are cruel. 

Mother I need 
mother I need 
mother I need your blackness now   
as the august earth needs rain.   
I am 

the sun and moon and forever hungry   
the sharpened edge 
where day and night shall meet 
and not be 
one.

Woods. A stand, waiting for the bite, the teeth.   
Joshua Briggs picks logs from the stack he’s cut,   
Sticks them in the black belly, fixing dinner— 
Pork, beans and slaw—before the night’s concert. 
Tunes shimmy in pieces. He looks out at his lot, his stand of   
Woods. Notes the green. That shine. 
“Play a tune on a jug; the moon pops out like a cork.   
But that’s nothing to playing a saw.” 

He puts in his teeth for the slaw. Sweet sap, molasses,   
Spreads around hillocks of salt pork into it. 
The Moonlight Sonata hangs over his head. 
And the light of the saw. “You can use it to cut, too.   
That very same instrument.” His parcel of 
Woods. Pieces of green; the notation of trunks and   
The land, that ground bass over which his 
Single strand of tune will soar like an angel. 

“Lots of people my age like a tune. 
Today it’s all beat but I give them music.” 
He begins to practice. The saw bends. 
Quavering moonlight fills the room. The saw 
Arches and twists between hand and thigh. 
He strokes it with his bow, “A cello bow made 
From manes of white Argentine horses. That country’s got   
Silver in its name.” The saw angles and dips 
Like a waterfall between hand and thigh. 

The semi-, demi-, hemi-quavers, the crotchets of   
Wood are joined as Joshua Briggs 
Bends what he saw. The tune rises like the holy ghost.   
It will rise, that Moonlight Sonata, 
Above the audience at the Grange 
Like the host. He will greet them with music. 
His white forelock falls over his eyes as he bows, twisting   
Silver between hand and thigh. 
He describes the tune in the air, sawing it into 
Parcels of light. “Angels are women; I know that.”   
The room is full of what he can accept.


He was eight when they gave him the felt overcoat— 
his birthday. 

He knew it was special. 
He was still reading Walter Scott not Gogol. The coat was light grey   
and he was a knight in armor. It was adamant. Iced snowballs   
and other missiles no longer hurt. Or barely. 

He grew as do all boys who are not dwarves or midgets. The coat   
grew, too. It kept pain out, and in. 

He only looked at colleges in northern places. 

He often drew the coat about him, like heroines   
wrapping their shawls more tightly. 

He was the intrepid leader through fresh snow and blue snow   
and rotten ice and the Mojave. 

He loved to look at women. It is difficult   
to make love wearing an overcoat. 

Gestalt and sandbox therapy did not help him   
remove the coat, but helped him to talk about it,   
to acknowledge it was there. 

He knew that all the others knew, had always known.   
Some urged him to undress. 

He saw La Boheme in San Francisco and felt betrayed   
when Schaunard sold his coat. Each time he played the CD   
he cried at the last act. 

He knew he had to get it off. Several times: Almost. Almost.   
Perhaps that is exaggeration. He’d cut off a sleeve or a lapel.   
But only pulled and wrenched the whole: it was so thick. 

Finally, at sixty-five he knew he could not. And sank   
into despair, the very state the coat was meant   
to turn away. 

He took a ship to France for his last meal. 
He took one home to jump. Felt really pulled   
him down into the deep.


(US Defence Secretary Rumsfeld dismissed those European countries which opposed the US attack on Iraq as only 'Old Europe')
Old Europe stared at her breakfast,
buttered her croissant, sipped coffee
which tasted like a gun
and blinked her grey eyes to restore the sun.
Old Europe grasped at the old A.J.P. Taylor
line, 'but in politics the impossible
always happens' more and more, hoped
for example, that the fact that the 'plant'
for weapons in Northern Iraq was shown
on the BBC an empty ex-Media
Centre, and miles away a plain village,
hoping not to be bombed, because by
mistake young Colin, who apparently
mistook often, used its name
at the UN as that of the 'plant',
would be accepted as a fact and then
protected, thought Old Europe
as her France loved to protect facts,
as her Germany to act, or her Belgium to be. But,
she reflected, in doubt and in debt,
the future is not an ally
over the sea which just needs to be
convinced but a masked soldier, dead
to Agincourt, Darmstadt, Verdun,
wanting oil and meat and not
understanding how a continental breakfast
keeps the blood in your head, your brain
not your gut. Old Europe set her spine
straight in the doorway sun. Her hand
crumbled bread as if it were old bone.



('Operation Iraqi Freedom')
It felt odd from the start, this war.
At the start, the 'death' of Saddam 
when Baghdad was bombed, but
               he's not dead, a bizarre
                          Zapata, 
and then the Scuds fired at  Kuwait
               but they weren't Scuds, 
the 'chemical weapons of mass destruction
factory',  with earth banks and barbed wire
                  which wasn't one, however, 
and the 'column of tanks destroyed leaving Basra'
                    which was three tanks, 
the endless 'securing' of towns and cities
                      which aren't secure 
even allowing for the distinction 
that 'secure' does not mean 'safe', 
the 'Uprising' in Basra 
which no one could find there...
                                  Once

there were poems in inverted commas, this
is a war of inverted commas. Once 
I wrote that 'poems about poems 
don't seem as abstract as they once did'
(although you don't need quotes, quoting 
yourself) and the Oxford Companion decided 
this meant I was no longer being abstract,  when
in fact I meant that poems about poems
(in that case partly a child) 
are not abstract because the abstract 
in them works through to a deeper real. Will
this war work through to the deeper real 
at last? Now it seems again, however,
that it feels odd, this war. I have paid it 
careful attention for almost a fortnight and what 
I would note here is that singular oddness
of feeling it evokes: one is always
at a tangent to it somehow, albeit
with despair's edgy wit. The deaths
have black solidity, as if from method, no
white napalm suddenness...I thought: is it
farce encoring tragedy, but there
is too much earnest passion in the evil,
and one watches that eros like watching
spiders breed: 'It is what they do on this planet,'
as a child's science fiction exercise
might observe. Spiders feed in street windows
broken by children's bones flying, but
the US polls say yes: who want this so much.
Who know what they do and also that
they want those inverted commas, George-
Bush-as-by-George-Orwell.            Is the US
need for war not 'a way to teach Americans
geography' as Bierce is often quoted, but
a greed for abstractions: for the abstract, rather,
not met by food or sex or fashion, by
any intimate geography but this? But then
the abstract is not the inverted commas,
either, and it is those they want: the quotes
which in two days will expire,
                                the world 
left gasping with winded logic, the new 
skulls on dresses in the marketplace, 
damp empty dusty shoes. Günter Grass called 
this a 'wanted war' and perhaps that desire 
accounts for the oddncss of feeling: the animal 
impossibility of communication. In a damp 
concrete corner in the market, one's self-sense 
crouches close, alert for friendly fire.


for B. H.
I didn’t fall in love. I fell through it: 

Came out the other side moments later, hands full of matter, waking up from the dream of a bullet tearing through the middle of my body. 

I no longer understand anything for longer than a long moment, or the time it takes to receive the shot. 

This kind of gravity is like falling through a cloud, forgetting it all, and then being told about it later. On the day you fell through a cloud . . .

It must be true. If it were not, then when did these strands of silver netting attach to my hair? 

The problem was finding that you were real and not just a dream of clouds. 

If you weren’t real, I would address this letter to one of two entities: myself, or everyone else. The effect would be equivalent. 

The act of falling happens in time. That is, it takes long enough for the falling to shear away from the moments before and the moments after, long enough for one to have thought I am falling. I have been falling. I continue to fall.

Falling through a ring, in this case, would not mean falling through the center of the annulus—a planet floats there. Falling through the ring means falling through the spaces between the objects that together make the ring. 

On the way through, clasp your fists around the universe: 

Nothing but ice-gravel. 

But open your hands when you reach the other side. Quickly, before it melts.   

What did I leave you?


Whether on the boulevard or gravel backroad, 
I do not easily raise my hand to those who toss 
up theirs in anonymous hello, merely to say 
“I’m passing this way.” Once out of shyness, now 
reluctance to tip my hand, I admire the shrubbery 
instead. I’ve learned where the lines are drawn 
and keep the privet well trimmed. I left one house 
with toys on the floor for another with quiet rugs 
and a bed where the moon comes in. I’ve thrown 
myself at men in black turtlenecks only to find 
that home is best after all. Home where I sit 
in the glider, knowing it needs oil, like my own 
rusty joints. Where I coax blackberry to dogwood 
and winter to harvest, where my table is clothed 
in light. Home where I walk out on the thin page 
of night, without waving or giving myself away, 
and return with my words burning like fire in the grate. 


My mother sends the baby pictures she promised— 
egg hunting in Shelby Park, wooden blocks 
and Thumbelina tossed on the rug, knotty pine 
walls in a house lost to memory. I separate out
the early ones, studying my navel or crumbs 
on the tray, taken before my awareness 
of Sylvania Superflash. Here I am sitting 
on the dinette table, the near birthday cake 
striking me dumb. Two places of wedding china, 
two glasses of milk, posed for the marvelous 
moment: the child squishes the fluted rosettes, 
mother claps her hands, father snaps the picture 
in the face of time. When the sticky sweet
is washed off the page, we are pasted in an album 
of blessed amnesia. The father leaves the pine house 
and sees the child on weekends, the mother 
stores the china on the top shelf until it’s dull and crazed, 
the saucer-eyed girl grips her curved spoon 
like there’s no tomorrow.



When Walter B., one evening, explained to Beatrice that he “needed time,” Beatrice pulled the last bite of fish from Walter B.’s mouth and shook it at him. She wished he had said instead that he needed a timbrel, and off they would have gone together to the spectacle where the timbrelist often played. But Walter B. did not need a timbrel. Walter B. “needed time.” So Beatrice wrapped what was left of the fish in a red wool cloth and set out to find him some. It was cold outside. If I was time, wondered Beatrice, where would I be? She watched the humans in the distance breathe into the grass. If I was time, wondered Beatrice, how would I remind myself of where I was? She held the last bite of fish up to her mouth for warmth. It began to feel heavy in her hands. She wished he had said instead that he needed a timbrel. She wished she was for Walter B. the time he needed. But she was not. She unwrapped the last bite of fish and studied it. It reminded her of a world inside of which Walter B. was mostly gone. She rubbed her arms with it. She buried her face in it. It began to grow around her like a soft, white house. It grew, and it grew, until at last Beatrice was inside. She slowly walked through its rooms. In the first room, a pile of shovels. In the second, a pitcher of milk. When she stepped inside the third, Walter B. and the timbrelist were helping each other on with their coats. “If you were time,” called out Walter B., “where would you be?” Before Beatrice could answer, Walter B. saluted her, took the timbrelist by the hand, and left her alone in the soft, white house. Beatrice sat on the floor. Much later she would drink from the pitcher of milk. She would lean against the pile of shovels. But for now all Beatrice could do was sit on the floor. She would sit on the floor of the soft, white house until she grew hungry again for Walter B.’s last bite of fish.


A few days before the first snow the soldiers dressed like children began to appear. “Come quick,” said Beatrice, fetching Walter B. away from his scripture, “and bring candy!” Walter B. pulled on his robe and joined Beatrice on the balcony. “Oh look,” said Beatrice, “you can see their small, sweet eyes peeking through the bramble.” Walter B. threw a handful of red gumdrops into the air and watched the soldiers dressed like children scatter, and raise their arms in glee. “Feels sinful, doesn’t it?” purred Beatrice. They watched them stand in the field and chew. “Which one,” asked Walter B., “do you think is the hero?” “That one,” said Beatrice. “Definitely that one. The one with the mittens.” “Yes,” agreed Walter B., “the others seem less... festooned.” “And which one do you think,” asked Walter B., “is the traitor?” Beatrice bit her lip and looked around. “Maybe that one,” she said. “The one with the orange flower in the pocket of his vest.” Walter B. agreed, but to be certain he thought that he should ask. “Little traitor,” called out Walter B. The traitor looked up. “I knew it!” said Beatrice, clapping her hands. The traitor came closer. The wind shook the orange flower loose from his pocket, but he did not run after it. He missed his mother. The traitor came closer, but then he stopped. He curled into his flowerless vest and fell asleep. Walter B. and Beatrice yawned. The soldiers dressed like children opened their mouths as wide as they could, but there was no more candy. There would never again be more candy. And so they sailed away to another land.


Eating food from McDonald's is mathematically impossible.
Because before you can eat it, you have to order it.
And before you can order it, you have to decide what you want.
And before you can decide what you want, you have to read the menu.
And before you can read the menu, you have to be in front of the menu.
And before you can be in front of the menu, you have to wait in line.
And before you can wait in line, you have to drive to the restaurant.
And before you can drive to the restaurant, you have to get in your car.
And before you can get in your car, you have to put clothes on.
And before you can put clothes on, you have to get out of bed.
And before you can get out of bed, you have to stop being so depressed.
And before you can stop being so depressed, you have to understand what depression is.
And before you can understand what depression is, you have to think clearly.
And before you can think clearly, you have to turn off the TV.
And before you can turn off the TV, you have to free your hands.
And before you can free your hands, you have to stop masturbating.
And before you can stop masturbating, you have to get off.
And before you can get off, you have to imagine someone you really like with his pants off, encouraging you to explore his enlarged genitalia.
And before you can imagine someone you really like with his pants off encouraging you to explore his enlarged genitalia, you have to imagine that person stroking your neck.
And before you can imagine that person stroking your neck, you have to imagine that person walking up to you looking determined.
And before you can imagine that person walking up to you looking determined, you have to choose who that person is.
And before you can choose who that person is, you have to like someone.
And before you can like someone, you have to interact with someone.
And before you can interact with someone, you have to introduce yourself.
And before you can introduce yourself, you have to be in a social situation.
And before you can be in a social situation, you have to be invited to something somehow.
And before you can be invited to something somehow, you have to receive a telephone call from a friend.
And before you can receive a telephone call from a friend, you have to make a reputation for yourself as being sort of fun.
And before you can make a reputation for yourself as being sort of fun, you have to be noticeably fun on several different occasions.
And before you can be noticeably fun on several different occasions, you have to be fun once in the presence of two or more people.
And before you can be fun once in the presence of two or more people, you have to be drunk.
And before you can be drunk, you have to buy alcohol.
And before you can buy alcohol, you have to want your psychological state to be altered.
And before you can want your psychological state to be altered, you have to recognize that your current psychological state is unsatisfactory.
And before you can recognize that your current psychological state is unsatisfactory, you have to grow tired of your lifestyle.
And before you can grow tired of your lifestyle, you have to repeat the same patterns over and over endlessly.
And before you can repeat the same patterns over and over endlessly, you have to lose a lot of your creativity.
And before you can lose a lot of your creativity, you have to stop reading books.
And before you can stop reading books, you have to think that you would benefit from reading less frequently.
And before you can think that you would benefit from reading less frequently, you have to be discouraged by the written word.
And before you can be discouraged by the written word, you have to read something that reinforces your insecurities.
And before you can read something that reinforces your insecurities, you have to have insecurities.
And before you can have insecurities, you have to be awake for part of the day.
And before you can be awake for part of the day, you have to feel motivation to wake up.
And before you can feel motivation to wake up, you have to dream of perfectly synchronized conversations with people you desire to talk to.
And before you can dream of perfectly synchronized conversations with people you desire to talk to, you have to have a general idea of what a perfectly synchronized conversation is.
And before you can have a general idea of what a perfectly synchronized conversation is, you have to watch a lot of movies in which people successfully talk to each other.
And before you can watch a lot of movies in which people successfully talk to each other, you have to have an interest in other people.
And before you can have an interest in other people, you have to have some way of benefiting from other people.
And before you can have some way of benefiting from other people, you have to have goals.
And before you can have goals, you have to want power.
And before you can want power, you have to feel greed.
And before you can feel greed, you have to feel more deserving than others.
And before you can feel more deserving than others, you have to feel a general disgust with the human population.
And before you can feel a general disgust with the human population, you have to be emotionally wounded.
And before you can be emotionally wounded, you have to be treated badly by someone you think you care about while in a naive, vulnerable state.
And before you can be treated badly by someone you think you care about while in a naive, vulnerable state, you have to feel inferior to that person.
And before you can feel inferior to that person, you have to watch him laughing and walking towards his drum kit with his shirt off and the sun all over him.
And before you can watch him laughing and walking towards his drum kit with his shirt off and the sun all over him, you have to go to one of his outdoor shows.
And before you can go to one of his outdoor shows, you have to pretend to know something about music.
And before you can pretend to know something about music, you have to feel embarrassed about your real interests.
And before you can feel embarrassed about your real interests, you have to realize that your interests are different from other people's interests.
And before you can realize that your interests are different from other people’s interests, you have to be regularly misunderstood.
And before you can be regularly misunderstood, you have to be almost completely socially debilitated.
And before you can be almost completely socially debilitated, you have to be an outcast.
And before you can be an outcast, you have to be rejected by your entire group of friends.
And before you can be rejected by your entire group of friends, you have to be suffocatingly loyal to your friends.
And before you can be suffocatingly loyal to your friends, you have to be afraid of loss.
And before you can be afraid of loss, you have to lose something of value.
And before you can lose something of value, you have to realize that that thing will never change.
And before you can realize that that thing will never change, you have to have the same conversation with your grandmother forty or fifty times.
And before you can have the same conversation with your grandmother forty or fifty times, you have to have a desire to talk to her and form a meaningful relationship.
And before you can have a desire to talk to her and form a meaningful relationship, you have to love her.
And before you can love her, you have to notice the great tolerance she has for you.
And before you can notice the great tolerance she has for you, you have to break one of her favorite china teacups that her mother gave her and forget to apologize.
And before you can break one of her favorite china teacups that her mother gave her and forget to apologize, you have to insist on using the teacups for your imaginary tea party. And before you can insist on using the teacups for your imaginary tea party, you have to cultivate your imagination.
And before you can cultivate your imagination, you have to spend a lot of time alone.
And before you can spend a lot of time alone, you have to find ways to sneak away from your siblings.
And before you can find ways to sneak away from your siblings, you have to have siblings.
And before you can have siblings, you have to underwhelm your parents.
And before you can underwhelm your parents, you have to be quiet, polite and unnoticeable.
And before you can be quiet, polite and unnoticeable, you have to understand that it is possible to disappoint your parents.
And before you can understand that it is possible to disappoint your parents, you have to be harshly reprimanded.
And before you can be harshly reprimanded, you have to sing loudly at an inappropriate moment.
And before you can sing loudly at an inappropriate moment, you have to be happy.
And before you can be happy, you have to be able to recognize happiness.
And before you can be able to recognize happiness, you have to know distress.
And before you can know distress, you have to be watched by an insufficient babysitter for one week.
And before you can be watched by an insufficient babysitter for one week, you have to vomit on the other, more pleasant babysitter.
And before you can vomit on the other, more pleasant babysitter, you have to be sick.
And before you can be sick, you have to eat something you’re allergic to.
And before you can eat something you’re allergic to, you have to have allergies.
And before you can have allergies, you have to be born.
And before you can be born, you have to be conceived.
And before you can be conceived, your parents have to copulate.
And before your parents can copulate, they have to be attracted to one another.
And before they can be attracted to one another, they have to have common interests.
And before they can have common interests, they have to talk to each other.
And before they can talk to each other, they have to meet.
And before they can meet, they have to have in-school suspension on the same day.
And before they can have in-school suspension on the same day, they have to get caught sneaking off campus separately.
And before they can get caught sneaking off campus separately, they have to think of somewhere to go.
And before they can think of somewhere to go, they have to be familiar with McDonald's.
And before they can be familiar with McDonald's, they have to eat food from McDonald's.
And eating food from McDonald's is mathematically impossible.


First turn to me after a shower, 
you come inside me sideways as always 

in the morning you ask me to be on top of you,   
then we take a nap, we’re late for school 

you arrive at night inspired and drunk,   
there is no reason for our clothes 

we take a bath and lie down facing each other,   
then later we turn over, finally you come 

we face each other and talk about childhood 
as soon as I touch your penis I wind up coming 

you stop by in the morning to say hello 
we sit on the bed indian fashion not touching 

in the middle of the night you come home   
from a nightclub, we don’t get past the bureau 

next day it’s the table, and after that the chair 
because I want so much to sit you down & suck your cock 

you ask me to hold your wrists, but then when I   
touch your neck with both my hands you come 

it’s early morning and you decide to very quietly   
come on my knee because of the children 

you’ve been away at school for centuries, your girlfriend   
has left you, you come four times before morning 

you tell me you masturbated in the hotel before you came by   
I don’t believe it, I serve the lentil soup naked 

I massage your feet to seduce you, you are reluctant,   
my feet wind up at your neck and ankles 

you try not to come too quickly   
also, you dont want to have a baby 

I stand up from the bath, you say turn around   
and kiss the backs of my legs and my ass 

you suck my cunt for a thousand years, you are weary   
at last I remember my father’s anger and I come 

you have no patience and come right away 
I get revenge and won’t let you sleep all night 

we make out for so long we can’t remember how   
we wound up hitting our heads against the wall 

I lie on my stomach, you put one hand under me   
and one hand over me and that way can love me 

you appear without notice and with flowers   
I fall for it and we become missionaries 

you say you can only fuck me up the ass when you are drunk   
so we try it sober in a room at the farm 

we lie together one night, exhausted couplets 
and don’t make love. does this mean we’ve had enough? 

watching t.v. we wonder if each other wants to   
interrupt the plot; later I beg you to read to me 

like the Chinese we count 81 thrusts   
then 9 more out loud till we both come 

I come three times before you do 
and then it seems you’re mad and never will 

it’s only fair for a woman to come more   
think of all the times they didn’t care


name address date 
I cannot remember 
an eye for an eye 
then and there my 


this    is 
your    se 
cond    ch 
ance    to 

h i s t o r y 
r e p e a t s 
i t s s e l f 

and a tooth 
for a tooth 
is a tooth:


Sidewalks of webs and weeds
Run parallel to empy lots where foul deeds
By handkerchief heads and winos were played,
To that old house where we stayed.
Irma Jean, Cora Jean and I, three debs,
Against the cracks of weeds and webs.

Sitting through matinees, dodging chores,
Chewing gum; claiming boys were bores.
But secretly grooming hair and breasts;

Jennie’s brood, a female nest.
Irma, long-legged, delicious full lips,
Taught Cora and me to wiggle our hips.
George Darlington Love, a beau, my first;
They yelled his name like a tribal curse

As his virginal fingers pressed our bell.
Against that background of sights and smells,
We ignored switchblades, zip guns, and knees
Shattered by cops in that place without trees.
Now memories of dances are sprinkled like seeds
Among cousins and sidewalks of webs and weeds.


The sidewalks were long where I grew up.
They were as veined as the backs
Of my Grandma’s hands.
We knew every inch of pavement;
We jumped the cracks
Chanting rhymes that broke evil spirits,
Played tag at sunset
Among the fireflies and sweet maple trees
Or sang wishful sonnets about boyfriends
To the tune of whipping jump ropes.
The sidewalks wrapped around corners
Like dirty ribbons lacing the old houses
Together in tight knots;
Maple trees bordered
The all-white cemetery.
Sometimes we’d watch Priscilla’s uncle
Sway down the dirt alley towards home.
We called her Pussy, called him
Crazy Max.
He was feebleminded and took to fits,
Barely making it from alley to pavement,
Loping down the street like a drunk.
We paced his jagged walk
Against tumbling tunes,
Taunting each pigeon-toed footstep
With rhyme.
The boys      bolder, louder
The girls       tagging along
Braids flopping like twisted hemp,
Ending in brightly colored ribbons.
We turned our black faces into silence
When he finally made it home;
Watched him grope up the broken concrete stairs,
Clutch the wooden railing,
Lunge for the broken screen door
And his medicine.
His tongue flopped wildly,
Parrot noises drowning his sister’s cries
As she rushed from the black pit
Of their house.

One day, he leaned away from the safe umbrella
Of his sister’s voice;
Leaned into the sky,
Hanging on the porch rail like a rag doll,
Then fell into the cracks of the sidewalk.
We rarely chanted after that,
Always passed Pussy’s house in silence.
Sometimes I’d sit in the sweet stillness
Of Grandma’s moldy basement
And draw his outline on the wet fuzzy walls.
The grey concrete backdropped my stick figure
As it fell into nothingness.


                                   II

Bumpsy played the Dirty Dozens
As we jackknifed the length of the block,
Forcing grown-ups off the street.
We linked arms like soldiers,
Our black legs scissoring in precision.
    One’s a company, two’s a crowd
    Three on the sidewalk is not allowed—
    Last night, the night before
    Twenty-four robbers at my door—
    Po-lice, po-lice, do your duty
    Make this boy stop feeling my booty—
    Mary, Mary, tell me true
    Who is the one you love?
Tin soldiers, wooden guns, and sharp tongues.
We got comic books for the price of one
In blitz attacks at Old Man Farrow’s dirty store.
Garages were secret places for dirty jokes,
Our folks couldn’t afford cars.
When we got older, we played house for real
Until we found Terry’s baby sister’s body
Behind a stack of tires;
The melodies we’d sung still seemed to bounce
Off the dirty walls and stacks of comic books.


                                  III

Our houses ended at the sidewalk,
Whitewashed steps gleaming like teeth
Against the blocks of grey pavement.
We walked three blocks just to find
A vacant lot to feed Mildred’s thirst
For green grass.
Fat Vaughn could eat a whole sheet
Of newspaper in less than three minutes.
Once, I licked the damp cellar wall,
But the taste didn’t match the sweet smell.
Ten years later, I searched through Grandma’s
Things before they were sold for auction.
I found her picture, three comics and the wind-up
Victrola we had used to put on our version
Of Cotton Club musicals.
We traded days so we could all be stars;
The rest sang chorus until the Victrola
Ran out of steam, the record moaning
Like a sick calf.
I found the stack of old pillows
We collapsed on, giggling and tumbling
Against each other like puppies,
While the needle stuck in one groove
Cutting circles in the records.


the termites had deboned the thing
it was clean there was no saving it
 
in one bedroom a dresser with blue drawers
its peg-legs rested on pure membrane
 
a girl just stood in her underwear
ran the tips of her fingers over her ribs
 
thought greyhound no one knew no explaining
why she didn’t fall through the floor
 
the kids were drinking beer in the yard
the tetherball rope caught one girl’s throat
 
her mother’s face obscured
behind the porch screen the mesquite shadow
 
no one could make her out
her feet rested on hot sashes of dust
 
the sounds on the television were far away
as that big caliche mound looked lake a waving man
 
the president got shot
the boards stayed together for another three days
 
it was a matter of apathy or swelling
or everyone was too hot to move


the live oak over the nursery got a disease
they could only save one limb
it wasn’t surprising; it wasn’t that kind of nursery
 
a girl rode her red tricycle around the bottom of the pool
the pool had no water; it hadn’t rained
 
the girl kept smelling her hand
it smelled like honeywheat, or the inside of a girl’s panties
 
someone said, race you
she nodded okay and pedaled like hell
after three laps no one had passed her
 
she looked over her shoulder, lost her balance
ripped her hands & knees on the blue concrete
 
the one limb on the live oak curved like a question
would she need stitches again
 
there was already ink under her skin & iodine on her tongue
or was it the other way around
 
she could see black thread bunching
sewing centipedes under her skin
 
her throat burned and she couldn’t move her legs
it wasn’t a tricycle
it was something she couldn’t get her foot out from under
 
she hated to stop or lose her shoe and, I’m sorry
the pool was full of water

The straight neck held up out of the lace
is bound with a black velvet band.
She holds her mouth the way she chooses,
the full underlip constrained by a small muscle.

She doesn’t blink or look aside,
although her left eye is considering
a slant. She would smile
if she had time, but right now

there is composure to be invented.
She stares at the photographer.
The black crepe settles. Emerging
from the sleeve, a shapely hand

holds out a white, translucent blossom.
“They always say things which embarrass
my dog,” she tells the photographer.
She is amused, but not as much as he’d like.


It seems a certain fear underlies everything. 
If I were to tell you something profound
it would be useless, as every single thing I know
is not timeless. I am particularly risk-averse.

I choose someone else over me every time, 
as I'm sure they'll finish the task at hand, 
which is to say that whatever is in front of us
will get done if I'm not in charge of it.

There is a limit to the number of times 
I can practice every single kind of mortification 
(of the flesh?). I can turn toward you and say yes, 
it was you in the poem. But when we met,

you were actually wearing a shirt, and the poem 
wasn't about you or your indecipherable tattoo. 
The poem is always about me, but that one time 
I was in love with the memory of my twenties

so I was, for a moment, in love with you 
because you remind me of an approaching
subway brushing hair off my face with 
its hot breath. Darkness. And then light,

the exact goldness of dawn fingering
that brick wall out my bedroom window 
on Smith Street mornings when I'd wake
next to godknowswho but always someone

who wasn't a mistake, because what kind 
of mistakes are that twitchy and joyful 
even if they're woven with a particular 
thread of regret: the guy who used

my toothbrush without asking,
I walked to the end of a pier with him,
would have walked off anywhere with him
until one day we both landed in California

when I was still young, and going West
meant taking a laptop and some clothes
in a hatchback and learning about produce.
I can turn toward you, whoever you are,

and say you are my lover simply because
I say you are, and that is, I realize,
a tautology, but this is my poem. I claim
nothing other than what I write, and even that,

I'd leave by the wayside, since the only thing
to pack would be the candlesticks, and 
even those are burned through, thoroughly
replaceable. Who am I kidding? I don't

own anything worth packing into anything.
We are cardboard boxes, you and I, stacked
nowhere near each other and humming
different tunes. It is too late to be writing this.

I am writing this to tell you something less
than neutral, which is to say I'm sorry.
It was never you. It was always you:
your unutterable name, this growl in my throat.


Memory is
flotsam (yes) just 
below the surface 
an eternal city 
a heap of rubble 
debris smaller
than your fist
an animal with-
out a leash 
organized wreck-
age ghost net

or one hanging
silence on the phone—
she's gone, my sister said,
and we wept and wept
over my grandmother
while my sister sat
with her body and me
in the static and the rabbi
they sent told her to recite psalms
as comfort so we listened to each other
breathe instead and my sister's breath was
a tunnel a handful of pebbles a knotted
Chinese jump-rope         her breath was the coiled
terrycloth turban our grandmother wore when she cooked
or walked the shallow end of her condo pool for exercise—
our grandmother still somewhere in her white turban sewing
Cornish game hens together with needle and string or
somewhere in her good wig playing poker or
somewhere in her easy chair watching CNN
while cookies shaped like our initials bake
in her oven O memory how much you
erased how many holes         we punched

in your facts since who knows the stories
she never told about the camps there are
no marked graves just too much food on
holidays diabetes my mother's fear
of ships and the motion of some
suspension bridges O memory
you've left us trauma below
the surface and some above
like the fact that I can't
shake the December
my sister's red hair
caught fire from
leaning too close
to the menorah's
candles, our
grandmother
putting her
out with a
dish towel
with her
strong
arms. 


March 10th and the snow flees like eloping brides 
into rain. The imperceptible change begins
out of an old rage and glistens, chaste, with its new
craving, spring. May your desire always overcome
 
your need; your story that you have to tell,
enchanting, mutable, may it fill the world
you believe: a sunny view, flowers lunging
from the sill, the quilt, the chair, all things
 
fill with you and empty and fill. And hurry, because
now as I tire of my studied abandon, counting
the days, I’m sad. Yet I trust your absence, in everything
wholly evident: the rain in the white basin, and I
 
vigilant. 


It seems like I'm growing more and more like a clown. First of all, I'm always
sad. Secondly, all my knives are made out of rubber. Thirdly, it's like my house 
is on fire.

No, I'm definitely becoming more like a clown. I have a tendency to want to put
on clown clothes. As soon as I put the clown clothes on I feel faintly happier...

Another sign is that I constantly feel like I'm alone in a dressing room. Most 
of the time I feel amused. Anyway, the only thing good about the circus is 
the tigers.

I realize that I could get both legs cut off by the circus train or get frightened
by an elephant. But it's very depressing to sit around in a clown suit and think
about death.

Sometimes I don't feel happy unless I'm in my clown suit. And I enjoy hitting
people on the head with a foam club. I really do...

When people see me they realize that it looks very sophisticated to wear a clown
suit and smoke a cigarette. This is how I get all the ladies because they think I'm
very droll.

People don't understand how you turn into a clown. You turn into a clown 
because you feel more and more like putting on a clown suit. When you're 
around people you sense a kindliness. It makes you so nervous you can't 
stay calm. Which is why it feels perfectly normal to wear orange pants.

Plus, it's very subversive to wear bow ties. You can't imagine how jolly 
everything is. And the fright wigs... I don't want to be a clown but I'm 
sure to be one. My mother was a clown.


I ran into the afterlife. 
No fluffy white clouds. Not even stars. Only sky 
dark as the inside of a movie theater 
at three in the afternoon and getting bigger all the time, 
expanding at terrific speed 
over the car which was disappearing, 
flattening out empty 
as the fields on either side. 

                                             It was impossible to think 
under that rain louder than engines. 
I turned off the radio to listen, let my head 
fill up until every bone 
was vibrating—sky. 

                            Twice, trees of lightning 
broke out of the asphalt. I could smell 
the highway burning. Long after, saw blue smoke twirling 
behind the eyeballs, lariats 
doing fancy rope tricks, jerking silver 
dollars out of the air, along with billiard cues, ninepins. 

I was starting to feel I could drive forever 
when suddenly one of those trees was right in front of me. 
Of course, I hit it— 
branches shooting stars down the windshield, 
poor car shaking like a dazed cow. 
I thought this time for sure I was dead 
so whatever was on the other side had to be eternity. 

Saw sky enormous as nowhere. Kept on driving. 


Tonight the bear 
comes to the orchard and, balancing 
on her hind legs, dances under the apple trees, 
hanging onto their boughs, 
dragging their branches down to earth. 
Look again. It is not the bear 
but some afterimage of her 
like the car I once saw in the driveway 
after the last guest had gone. 
Snow pulls the apple boughs to the ground. 
Whatever moves in the orchard— 
heavy, lumbering—is clear as wind. 

The bear is long gone. 
Drunk on apples, 
she banged over the trash cans that fall night, 
then skidded downstream. By now 
she must be logged in for the winter. 
Unless she is choosy. 
I imagine her as very choosy, 
sniffing at the huge logs, pawing them, trying 
each one on for size, 
but always coming out again. 

Until tonight. 
Tonight sap freezes under her skin. 
Her breath leaves white apples in the air. 
As she walks she dozes, 
listening to the sound of axes chopping wood. 
Somewhere she can never catch up to 
trees are falling. Chips pile up like snow 
When she does find it finally, 
the log draws her in as easily as a forest, 
and for a while she continues to see, 
just ahead of her, the moon 
trapped like a salmon in the ice.


ghosts of America roam
land of fast food
                                       joints defined by movement

herds of taxi cabs apartments too expensive to rent

trained hands typing digital lives

                                                          commotion rust-shriek & blur of subway trains

                            O New York!       until my legs detect a din i walk

(signs call me back)

                                    shoes snivel   eyes a pocket
     
    wrinkled youth palsied
                                           elephantine ankles   cross-eyed ditty

a tic in the face is a chronicle of past grievings
                                                                              a cancerous cell love uncaved 
i write into this handbook of daytime things   tantrums   & baby paraphernalia


            claiming words which gather time

answering life   i sit & stare into cracks     stars of fate 
i visit you
across the sea of
                      disease between us
                                                                                                         let us be stricken 
                                                                                                         with poems


only you are allowed to enter
                                              voice for the first time 
                             the look   hesitant   undemanding

            body supple as sound 
    the hand   unexpected   a fruit falling

                           skin curves of sand
                                                  lull below the arms 
                   scent of the ocean's salt


                                                           2
                  
                              the body pushed into life's mouth


                                                          3


                                          velvet crunch 
                  of white under feet   my heart

                                       snowy lizards' tails
   sleeping on branches
                                                      arms rhyme
                                           with bending earth

                                                       a shadow slants
                              like a calligrapher's quill


                                                         4

                                            pass the threshold


                                                         5

                                  a genus of the solitary
                                                                 the knitted
                       night       stained-glass boxes
                                             where memories ferment
                                             unplanned   you come


                                                         6

         saguaros crack      monsoons

                                                        consider erosion of rocks

   water's fire    lit

                  worlds intersect           dusk     purity of ascent

ferocious nose of a cat
                                              incandescent          through forces

                            stay up waiting

                                                     planes converge        fates intersect


                                                          7

                           how long does a measure last?


                                                          8

     sea in the sky
                                                         knives
                                   striking obliquely           army of light
                                                                        beating walls
                                            the aquamarine houses are ghosts
                                                                                                 between crystal trees
                                water steals over skewed floors

only this life


                                                          9

                                  a cat sleeps one eye opened


A black satin purse in her right hand, 
condoms, spermicide, 
her key to the birdcage elevator. 
All night, thunder and rain 
in a flash of lightning, his hands visible, 
leaves of philodendron, a half-moon table. 

They talk in near dark, eating from a basket. 
She places her hand in his lap, 
opens her legs as if God came from her, 
fragrance pluming like smoke. 
All night, his tongue like a fish 
philodendron green smoothing half-light. 

Now the bridge is illuminated, twin 
arches rising, chalky, incandescent, 
light abandoning the dome of sky, 
river breathing azure, its surface frazzled, 
the moon leaving her scuff marks. 
Near the open window, dark of leaves. 

Outside at dawn, the sun hidden, 
a crow lowering itself on black wings 
crosses before windows as gold as Rome. 
The telephone, her mouth open. 
I can see all the way into you, he says. 
Leaves of philodendron pour from the table.


The glass door was spinning panes 
like an open book. 
A suit the color of sky close to night, 
wire of eyeglasses a gold moon. 

He bowed as if judicial 
and called a French name. 
Glasses were filled with ice 
the color of amber. 

We were in America. 

He asked me to take his hands. 
They are cold, he said. 
I warmed his cold hands 
as we sat on the rouge banquette. 

It was the last May of the century. 

His eyes looked at my face. 
His hand fell to the glacier 
of my thigh and held on. 
My gold tail swam dark green water, 
the ocean smelled of gardenia. 
Outside on the avenue people 
scurried to their palaces, wearing 
sunglasses, carrying shiny bags.



If you catch a firefly 
            and keep it in a jar 
You may find that 
            you have lost 
A tiny star. 

If you let it go then, 
            back into the night, 
You may see it 
            once again 
Star bright.


I left my head 
somewhere 
today. 
Put it down for 
just 
a minute. 
Under the 
table? 
On a chair? 
Wish I were 
able 
to say 
where. 
Everything I need 
is 
in it!


Snow covers
The hills one by one
Our neighborhood
Characters become
San Francisco 1874
Words later language
A photograph
At home when
Light writes 1974
Or 1979
We move where
The Lives of My Books
Pages accumulate
Not legible as themselves
Historical time 1989
Startled leaves us
Unafraid though
Overgrown
Died in 1993
Moved in 1994
In pink stone
Earlier in "The Park"
Wrote shells and cherubs
The cathedral
The fountain


A young black girl stopped by the woods, 
so young she knew only one man: Jim Crow 
but she wasn’t allowed to call him Mister. 
The woods were his and she respected his boundaries 
even in the absence of fence. 
Of course she delighted in the filling up 
of his woods, she so accustomed to emptiness, 
to being taken at face value. 
This face, her face eternally the brown 
of declining autumn, watches snow inter the grass, 
cling to bark making it seem indecisive 
about race preference, a fast-to-melt idealism. 
With the grass covered, black and white are the only options, 
polarity is the only reality; corners aren’t neutral 
but are on edge. 
She shakes off snow, defiance wasted 
on the limited audience of horse. 
The snow does not hypnotize her as it wants to, 
as the blond sun does in making too many prefer daylight. 
She has promises to keep, 
the promise that she bear Jim no bastards, 
the promise that she ride the horse only as long 
as it is willing to accept riders, 
the promise that she bear Jim no bastards, 
the promise to her face that it not be mistaken as shadow, 
and miles to go, more than the distance from Africa to Andover, 
more than the distance from black to white 
before she sleeps with Jim. 



In the heavy fashion magazines strewn here and there around the house the photos of objects and people mouth the word “money,” but you, assuming no one wants you anymore, mishear the message as “meaning.” Arousal follows. The lives of the rich are so fabulous! The destruction of the poetical lies heavily on their hands, as on their swollen notion that we are always watching. There is nothing behind the mask. Nothing suffocating under its pressure, no human essence trying to get out.
     Awareness, always awareness. Don’t you see how these elaborate masks are turning you into a zombie? The private life is not for the eye but for the endless interior. It is trying to push all this crap aside and find the missing line. Nobody, least of all the future, cares about the outcome of this quest.
      It is easy to lose, through meddling or neglect, an entire aspect of existence. And sometimes, to cultivate a single new thought, you need not only silence but an entirely new life.

For Ann Lauterbach
Hemmed in by an un-

tenable image:

                 feathers planted 

below fragile branches 

                 of avian feet            scaly crossroads scoring

a particular blue of sky

                 offending 

through the uselessness of misplaced

                  forms                       thorny prongs

that make no sense (and yet belong)
 
                  on the ground

out of which

                  the bird wings stiffly jut 

rigid as

                  rhubarb leaf.
 
                                                    Should you

kneel the body's aged mechanism

                beneath the shade of dry feathers, 
 
                                                    should you 

angle the vulnerable cavern

                of ear—trembling passage to psyche's
  
                failures   our fall

into suffering                           knowledge—toward the root

                                                    should you

listen        you will hear
  
                the wasted strains of an underground song 

rising from the muffled beak: site of a perverse smothering

                throated core submerged 

deadened by thoughtless depths

                but alive 

for the dead have kept it

                safe from false music 

a ghoulish guard of LOVE
 
                                                  SAFE from

                Psyche 

she who
 
               bullied by the cruelty of others

the sophistication of fashionable libraries
 
             the envy of those

who would molest the world into false confessions

and banish                              all mystery

             with their dripping

candles                   she who would

unearth the birdsong                         to cage it

she who                 will end by destroying what she loves most.
 
           Shhhh, quiet

listen:

it is drawn by other amblers
 
               its strains awake in our attentions

as a sudden           bewildering              happiness

              ear wedded to earth, listen

and hear
   
          what those who know all 

can not.


You are a ukulele beyond my microphone 
You are a Yukon beyond my Micronesia 
You are a union beyond my meiosis 
You are a unicycle beyond my migration 
You are a universe beyond my mitochondria 
You are a Eucharist beyond my Miles Davis 
You are a euphony beyond my myocardiogram 
You are a unicorn beyond my Minotaur 
You are a eureka beyond my maitai 
You are a Yuletide beyond my minesweeper 
You are a euphemism beyond my myna bird 
You are a unit beyond my mileage 
You are a Yugoslavia beyond my mind’s eye 
You are a yoo-hoo beyond my minor key 
You are a Euripides beyond my mime troupe 
You are a Utah beyond my microcosm 
You are a Uranus beyond my Miami 
You are a youth beyond my mylar 
You are a euphoria beyond my myalgia 
You are a Ukranian beyond my Maimonides 
You are a Euclid beyond my miter box 
You are a Univac beyond my minus sign 
You are a Eurydice beyond my maestro 
You are a eugenics beyond my Mayan 
You are a U-boat beyond my mind control 
You are a euthanasia beyond my miasma 
You are a urethra beyond my Mysore 
You are a Euterpe beyond my Mighty Sparrow 
You are a ubiquity beyond my minority 
You are a eunuch beyond my migraine 
You are a Eurodollar beyond my miserliness 
You are a urinal beyond my Midol 
You are a uselessness beyond my myopia


They just can’t seem to . . . They should try harder to . . . They ought to be more . . . We all wish they weren’t so . . . They never . . . They always . . . Sometimes they . . . Once in a while they . . . However it is obvious that they . . . Their overall tendency has been . . . The consequences of which have been . . . They don’t appear to understand that . . . If only they would make an effort to . . . But we know how difficult it is for them to . . . Many of them remain unaware of . . . Some who should know better simply refuse to . . . Of course, their perspective has been limited by . . . On the other hand, they obviously feel entitled to . . . Certainly we can’t forget that they . . . Nor can it be denied that they . . . We know that this has had an enormous impact on their . . . Nevertheless their behavior strikes us as . . . Our interactions unfortunately have been . . .


Imagine for a moment 
the still life of our meals, 
meat followed by yellow cheese, 
grapes pale against the blue armor of fish. 

Imagine a thin woman 
before bread was invented, 
playing a harp of wheat in the field. 
There is a stone, and behind her 
the bones of the last killed, 
the black bird on her shoulder 
that a century later 
will fly with trained and murderous intent. 

They are not very hungry 
because cuisine has not yet been invented. 
Nor has falconry, 
nor the science of imagination. 

All they have is the pure impulse to eat, 
which is not enough to keep them alive 
and this little moment 
before the woman redeems 
the sprouted seeds at her feet 
and gathers the olives falling from the trees 
for her recipes. 

Imagine. Out in the fields 
this very moment 
they are rolling the apples to press, 
the lamb turns in a regular aura of smoke. 

See, the woman looks once behind her 
before picking up the stone, 
looks back once at the beasts, 
the trees, 
that sky 
above the white stream 
where small creatures live and die 
looking upon each other 
as food. 


John F. Kennedy
        New York City
            I saw him across the lobby
                 flight 161
                     St. Louis
                         Albuquerque.
Coyote looked in control
        cool 
             fitting right into the city
                 smiling when a pretty woman passed him
                     figuring out his flight
                          making calculations from behind
                              the New York Times.
Slick
         right down to his Tony Lamas
             Coyote
                 I’d recognize him anywhere
                     Copenhagen
                          New York
                              Gallup.
People say
you can dress ’em up
        but once a coyote
             always a coyote.

On top of Black Mesa there are flowers
On top of Black Mesa there are flowers
       dew on yellow flowers
       mountain flowers I see
       so far away that it makes me cry.
She opened her eyes slowly,
       as if to awaken from a trance
           cast by a song,
           transporting her to childhood,
       Back to the flowers  
       growing atop Black Mesa,
       so far and yet
       clearly brilliant.
Awake from the song,
       Gia focused on her daughter,
       anxiously awaiting 
       to be taught a new song.
The old woman chose to take her time,
       she had learned from experience,
       attention is better paid by children,
       when there is a little pause,
           and mystery
               in storytelling.
Soon enough Gia spoke . . . 
        “When I was a young girl,
        my family would camp 
        below Kwheng sa po,
        during the farming months.
        We spent most of our days
        following my grandmother
        through rows of corn
        and playing in the streams below.
        One day white men came in a wagon,
        telling us about a school for Indians,
        run by the government.
        We were told this school would educate
        and prepare us for jobs in the white man’s world. 
        None of us knew what any of it meant,
        but these men spoke sweetly
        offering grandmother a roll of baling wire
        for each child that went to school.
        Before we knew what was happening,
        we were sitting in the back of their wagon,
        on our way to government school,
        away from our families,
        to another man’s world.
        Often we would cry,
        out of loneliness,
        but this song helped us
        to remember our home.”
Get thoughtfully straightened
the pleats on her skirt,
swallowing the last of her coffee.
Smiling, she continued . . . 
        “The government school taught sewing,
        I learned on an electric machine.
        By the time I returned to the village I could
        sew, but few of the people had heard of sewing machines,
        or even electricity.
        The machine I learned to operate as my trade
        could not be carried here and there,
        but this song you are learning,
        will always be carried in your heart,  
        here and there.”


It was like soul-kissing, the way the words 
filled my mouth as Mrs. Purdy read from her desk. 
All the other kids zoned an hour ahead to 3:15, 
but Mrs. Purdy and I wandered lonely as clouds borne 
by a breeze off Mount Parnassus. She must have seen 
the darkest eyes in the room brim: The next day 
she gave me a poem she’d chosen especially for me 
to read to the all except for me white class. 
She smiled when she told me to read it, smiled harder, 
said oh yes I could. She smiled harder and harder 
until I stood and opened my mouth to banjo playing 
darkies, pickaninnies, disses and dats. When I finished 
my classmates stared at the floor. We walked silent 
to the buses, awed by the power of words.



I don’t have any sentiments 
would somebodything thirst my quench 
how about 
about my mediocrity of character? I dance 
with the dead divinely 
                                 in my dreams 
I’m stricken deaf when I mention it my babies 
cry they want everything quick! here. un- 
mentioned    
                  as character should be 
      like the purpurine it needs must be carved in, 
                        please 

Have you heard of the roguess elephant with the 
brilliant diamond eyes? She is the puppet 
of the dictionary 
                           where is her beautiful orange 
juice?    
            puppy foot!    
                                 When your father dies 
he doesn’t let you swoon    
                                       into aventurine or spray 
of lily (pearls) of the valley 
you do not bifurcate 
                               you may 
supplicate       
                   play yourself to your camp heroine 
self—play it Lady play 
It       
       but delete no matter 
       thank you for breakfast 
       today we will visit with the ear syringe 
       be the current density    
                                           honey flower 
                                           ice egg 
I love you as a fan loves air. oops it’s I 
                vice-versa I 
                                  told you about that 
       character       
                           She is a bezel 
                           awaiting the plop of a 
                           ruby she must grow 
                           chronically 

and I can’t end and I can’t lie 
here          
               He held him in his own heart then 
               may I in my eye now me


The Goddess who created this passing world 
Said Let there be lightbulbs & liquefaction 
Life spilled out onto the street, colors whirled 
Cars & the variously shod feet were born 
And the past & future & I born too 
Light as airmail paper away she flew 
To Annapurna or Mt. McKinley 
Or both but instantly 
Clarified, composed, forever was I 
Meant by her to recognize a painting 
As beautiful or a movie stunning 
And to adore the finitude of words 
And understand as surfaces my dreams 
Know the eye the organ of affection 
And depths to be inflections 
Of her voice & wrist & smile



I’m practicing my
         I-belong-here
         no-twig-snap
         no-leaf-rustle
         no-branch-crack
         see-all, know-all
         float-like-fog
         like-smoke
         pine-needle-soft
         forest walk. 
No one will know I’m coming.
No one will know when I’m gone.
﻿


I am a careful marshmallow toaster,
a patient marshmallow roaster,
turning my stick oh-so-slowly,
taking my time, checking often.
This is art---
a time of serious reflection
as my pillowed confection
slowly reaches golden perfection.
 
My brother
            grabs ‘em with grubby hands
                        shoves ‘em on the stick
                                    burns ‘em to a crisp
                                                cools ‘em off
                                                            flicks soot
                                                                        eats quick.
 
I’m still turning my stick.
He’s already eaten six.
﻿


Between the imaginary iceberg and the skeletal whale
is the stuffed and mounted mermaid in her case,
the crudely-stitched seam between skin and scale
 
so unlike Herbert Draper’s siren dreams, loose
on the swelling tide, part virgin and part harpy.
Her post-mortem hair and her terrible face
 
look more like P.T. Barnum’s Freak of Feejee,
piscene and wordless, trapped in the net of a stare.
She has the head and shrivelled tits of a monkey,
 
the green glass eyes of a porcelain doll, a pair 
of praying-mantis hands, and fishy lips
open to reveal her sea-caved mouth, her rare
 
ivory mermaid-teeth. Children breathe and rap
on the glass to make her move. In her fixity
she’s as far as can be from the selkie who slips
 
her wet pelt on the beaches of Orkney
and walks as a woman, pupils widened in light,
discarding the stuffed sack of her body.
 
Without hearing, or touch, or taste, or smell, or sight
she echoes the numb roll of the whale
in a sea congealed with cold, when it was thought
 
no beast could be a nerveless as the whale.


The secretive hart turns at bay,
lowers his tines to the hounds’ cry.
The sword enters the bull’s heart—
                        still he stands,
            amazed on the red sand
as the stony unbeliever might,
 
who has seen God. Soon now
horns will sound dedow
for the unmaking. Beaters flush
                        the grey heron
            like a coney from its warren,
the peregrine’s jet eyes flash.
 
They go ringing up the air,
each in its separate spiral stair
to the indigo rim of the skies,
                        then descend
            swift as a murderer’s hand
with a knife. Death’s gesture liquefies
 
in bringing the priestly heron down.
Her prize, the marrow from a wing-bone
in which she delights, her spurred
                        fleur-de-lys tongue
            stained gold-vermilion—
little angel in her hangman’s hood.

It has been so wet stones glaze in moss; 
everything blooms coldly. 

I expect you. I thought one night it was you 
at the base of the drive, you at the foot of the stairs, 

you in a shiver of light, but each time 
leaves in wind revealed themselves, 

the retreating shadow of a fox, daybreak. 
We expect you, cat and I, bluebirds and I, the stove. 

In May we dreamed of wreaths burning on bonfires 
over which young men and women leapt. 

June efforts quietly. 
I’ve planted vegetables along each garden wall 

so even if spring continues to disappoint 
we can say at least the lettuce loved the rain. 

I have new gloves and a new hoe. 
I practice eulogies. He was a hawk 

with white feathered legs. She had the quiet ribs 
of a salamander crossing the old pony post road. 

Yours is the name the leaves chatter 
at the edge of the unrabbited woods.


Thousands of planes were flying and then 
they stopped. We spend days moving our eyes 

across makeshift desks, we sit on a makeshift floor; 
we prepare for almost nothing that might happen. 

Early on, distant relations kept calling. 
Now, nothing: sound of water 

tippling a seawall. Nothing: sparks 
lighting the brush, sparks polishing the hail, 

the flotsam of cars left standing perfectly still. 
Thud of night bird against night air, 

there you are on the porch, swath 
of feathers visible through the glass, 

there you are on the stairs where the cat fell 
like a stone because her heart stopped. 

What have you found in the wind above town square? 
Is it true that even the statues have gone? 

Is there really a hush over everything as there used to be 
in morning when one by one we took off our veils?


A full year passed (the seasons keep me honest) 
since I last noticed this same commotion. 
Who knew God was an abstract expressionist? 

I’m asking myself—the very question 
I asked last year, staring out at this array 
of racing colors, then set in motion 

by the chance invasion of a Steller’s jay. 
Is this what people mean by speed of light?
My usually levelheaded mulberry tree 

hurling arrows everywhere in sight— 
its bow: the out-of-control Virginia creeper 
my friends say I should do something about, 

whose vermilion went at least a full shade deeper 
at the provocation of the upstart blue, 
the leaves (half green, half gold) suddenly hyper 

in savage competition with that red and blue— 
tohubohu returned, in living color. 
Kandinsky: where were you when I needed you? 

My attempted poem would lie fallow a year; 
I was so busy focusing on the desert’s 
stinginess with everything but rumor. 

No place even for the spectrum’s introverts— 
rose, olive, gray—no pigment at all— 
and certainly no room for shameless braggarts 

like the ones that barge in here every fall 
and make me feel like an unredeemed failure 
even more emphatically than usual. 

And here they are again, their fleet allure 
still more urgent this time—the desert’s gone; 
I’m through with it, want something fuller— 

why shouldn’t a person have a little fun, 
some utterly unnecessary extravagance? 
Which was—at least I think it was—God’s plan 

when He set up (such things are never left to chance) 
that one split-second assignation 
with genuine, no-kidding-around omnipotence 

what, for lack of better words, I’m calling vision.
You breathe in, and, for once, there’s something there. 
Just when you thought you’d learned some resignation, 

there’s real resistance in the nearby air 
until the entire universe is swayed. 
Even that desert of yours isn’t quite so bare 

and God’s not nonexistent; He’s just been waylaid 
by a host of what no one could’ve foreseen. 
He’s got plans for you: this red-gold-green parade 

is actually a fairly detailed outline. 
David never needed one, but he’s long dead 
and God could use a little recognition. 

He promises. It won’t go to His head 
and if you praise Him properly (an autumn psalm! 
Why didn’t I think of that?) you’ll have it made. 

But while it’s true that my Virginia creeper praises Him, 
its palms and fingers crimson with applause, 
that the local breeze is weaving Him a diadem, 

inspecting my tree’s uncut gold for flaws, 
I came to talk about the way that violet-blue 
sprang the greens and reds and yellows 

into action: actual motion. I swear it’s true 
though I’m not sure I ever took it in. 
Now I’d be prepared, if some magician flew 

into my field of vision, to realign 
that dazzle out my window yet again. 
It’s not likely, but I’m keeping my eyes open 

though I still wouldn’t be able to explain 
precisely what happened to these vines, these trees. 
It isn’t available in my tradition. 

For this, I would have to be Chinese, 
Wang Wei, to be precise, on a mountain, 
autumn rain converging on the trees, 

a cassia flower nearby, a cloud, a pine, 
washerwomen heading home for the day, 
my senses and the mountain so entirely in tune 

that when my stroke of blue arrives, I’m ready. 
Though there is no rain here: the air’s shot through 
with gold on golden leaves. Wang Wei’s so giddy 

he’s calling back the dead: Li Bai! Du Fu! 
Guys! You’ve got to see this—autumn sun!
They’re suddenly hell-bent on learning Hebrew 

in order to get inside the celebration, 
which explains how they wound up where they are 
in my university library’s squashed domain. 

Poor guys, it was Hebrew they were looking for, 
but they ended up across the aisle from Yiddish— 
some Library of Congress cataloger’s sense of humor: 

the world’s calmest characters and its most skittish 
squinting at each other, head to head, 
all silently intoning some version of kaddish 

for their nonexistent readers, one side’s dead 
(the twentieth century’s lasting contribution) 
and the other’s insufficiently learned 

to understand a fraction of what they mean. 
The writings in the world’s most spoken language 
across from one that can barely get a minyan. 

Sick of lanzmen, the yidden are trying to engage 
the guys across the aisle in some conversation: 
How, for example, do you squeeze an image 

into so few words, respectfully asks Glatstein. 
Wang Wei, at first, doesn’t understand the problem 
but then he shrugs his shoulders, mumbles Zen 

... but, please, I, myself, overheard a poem, 
in the autumn rain, once, on a mountain. 
How do you do it? I believe it’s called a psalm?

Glatstein’s cronies all crack up in unison. 
Okay, groise macher, give him an answer. 
But Glatstein dons his yarmulke (who knew he had one?) 

and starts the introduction to the morning prayer, 
Pisukei di zimrah, psalm by psalm. 
Wang Wei is spellbound, the stacks’ stale air 

suddenly a veritable balm 
and I’m so touched by these amazing goings-on 
that I’ve forgotten all about the autumn 

staring straight at me: still alive, still golden. 
What’s gold, anyway, compared to poetry? 
a trick of chlorophyll, a trick of sun. 

True. It was something, my changing tree 
with its perfect complement: a crimson vine, 
both thrown into panic by a Steller’s jay, 

but it’s hard to shake the habit of digression. 
Wandering has always been my people’s way 
whether we’re in a desert or narration. 

It’s too late to emulate Wang Wei 
and his solitary years on that one mountain 
though I’d love to say what I set out to say 

just once. Next autumn, maybe. What’s the occasion?
Glatstein will shout over to me from the bookcase 
(that is, if he’s paying any attention) 

and, finally, I’ll look him in the face. 
Quick. Out the window, Yankev. It’s here again.


You give me a little courage, Mary,
in your skittish dedication to her highness;
I too can dare as humbleness may dare;
if there’s anywhere to speak with you, it’s here
at the wordy Anglo-Saxon periphery
of the universe’s one great surge of praise
 
though I’m lost here. Where’s the joyful noise?
the syllables I managed to memorize
before they were weighted down by meaning?
and what’s all this complicated rhyme?
Don’t mistake me—I’m not complaining;
it’s just not my notion of a psalm
 
for all my love of wrought, elaborate things—
especially when they’re the sort that sings
and yours do sing a stunning song—
but they’re off-kilter without the awe
inherent in my ancient holy tongue.
I miss my amen sela, hallelujah
 
though I do applaud you and your brother—
going for the full linguistic bait-and-switch
in the move from one language to another:
David’s disarmingly direct speech
a tour-de-force of formal contrivance
(no form repeated more than once
 
in each of a hundred fifty psalms!)
in your show-off/virtuoso hands.
Talk about such a song in such a land—
but what else is there in dreary England?
Its sole extravagance a trove of synonyms
that endlessly perplexes and expands
 
its mongrel, unbeautiful tongue—
a language, frankly, crying out for poetry
given its absence, even, of integrity
not to mention intrinsic song. . . .
(Its sound: water going down the drain
according to my friend, an Italian,
 
after riding in a compartment of Americans
gurgling all the way from Florence to Rome.)
Why not a convoluted scheme
of intricately wrought meter and rhyme?
So what if the Hebrew has no strict patterns?
Aim for a parallel sublime;
 
aren’t poems for the impossible?
Though perhaps yours wouldn’t have been written
had you known how daunting their task was;
you had no Hebrew, used the Coverdale,
Wyatt, Geneva Bible, as cribs for Latin,
even psaumes de David, mis en rime Françoise . . .
 
Clearly, your secret weapon was ignorance,
also useful (look at me!) in writing a poem,
your psalms fourth- and fifth-hand half the time.
Unless (of course!) your stroke of brilliance
was to focus on the one thing you could do:
Sing and let your song be new
 
which they are, profoundly, even to me,
who know so many bits of the originals
of what you claim you’re “translating” by heart.
Still, I’ll be reading along, alternately
put off and spellbound by your art-
ifice, when my wary eye suddenly falls
 
on something both completely known and new,
my own—our own—ungainly language
for a brief instant alien with grace,
a black-on-white typescript mirage
in which English letters turn into Hebrew
or at least intercept its holiness. . . .
 
How did you manage it, Mary?
Your contemporaries called it piety—
but I don’t believe that for a second.
What motivated you was love of poetry,
or rather of your legendary
brother—lost so young—whom you would spend
 
your whole life working to immortalize. . . .
I’m not sure he needed you. No lighter touch
exists in English poetry than his . . .
a touch you often managed to approach
in your grief-induced lyric resolve
to force a bit of him to stay alive.
 
Poetry as solace, as wizardry—
and there he is, with you, all the time,
clearly palpable in all your artistry.
It was your eagerness to be with him
that kept you going back to intervene
with yet one more indomitable line,
 
got you through all hundred-fifty psalms.
Or maybe it was just your poet’s ruse
(poetry often thrives on self-delusion)
to trick yourself to rise to his occasion. . . .
Unless he just provided the excuse
to stake your own (quite vast) poetic claims,
 
impossible to say from this vantage point:
to distinguish collaborator from muse,
self-doubt from false humility
but, then again, there’s a poetry in mystery.
Who will contradict me if I confuse
my own passions with yours—so convenient,
 
inevitable?—in a poem like this—
though you and I—despite the labyrinth
of misapprehension, class, religion
reinforcing our dissociation
(Jew from Christian, commoner from countess,
twenty-first-century from seventeenth)
 
come together in passion upon passion
(forgive me, Mary, if dare too far):
psalms, poetic forms, your genius brother
(I mean both the poet and the man;
no poem could manufacture that much charm).
We’ve even suffered from a kindred harm:
 
my version, albeit, fairly mild,
though I too was admonished as a child
about what a woman dared not do.
Still, I have a vast cohort, while you
were almost entirely alone.
Better yet, I had the complete Dickinson
 
(published just a year before I was born);
I didn’t know it yet, but I had you . . .
while you had to ransack antiquity
for even fragments of poems by a woman.
But of course you weren’t troubled by inequity—
it was, frankly, all you knew—
 
you might even have relished your position
as sole woman poet, thinker, patron—
lonely as it was—though you did encourage
your precocious niece, Mary (later Wroth).
And who can really estimate the damage
of your appalling bargain: a brother’s death
 
required to turn you into poet?
Of course, in your time, death was everywhere.
Perhaps you were pious—a last resort
to shore up an attenuated heart
against even further disrepair,
immersion in the psalms a sort of antidote
 
to life’s massive overdose of pain:
from living with a sad, disfigured mother
(small-pox scars from nursing a sick queen)
mourning her husband’s lost affection
to deaths of favorites—your sister, your brother,
your only daughters, Katherine, then Anne.
 
God made this day; he did us send it
In joy and mirth then let us spend it
Excellent advice, if it would hold—
And maybe it does, when you can summon
all that air or life enfold
to distract you with a binge of exaltation . . .
 
or if that fails, then an assiduous
extravaganza of sublime detail
calibrated to provide the wherewithal
to face a universe we cannot alter
if not with joy and mirth, at least with grace:
a perfect, hand-illuminated psalter,
 
the loops of all its letters filled with gold—
a treasure, even, for an exacting Queen—
offering a deity who’ll listen
to a voice alternately humble, bold,
beseeching, thankful, ecstatic, bleak,
through which (hallelujah, Mary!) you still speak.




It happened in Physics,
reading a Library art book under the desk,
(the lesson was Archimedes in the bath)
I turned a page and fell
for an older man, and anonymous at that,
hardly ideal –
he was four hundred and forty-five,
I was fourteen.
‘Eureka!’ streaked each thought
(I prayed no-one would hear)
and Paradise all term
was page 179
(I prayed no-one would guess).
Of course
my fingers, sticky with toffee and bliss,
failed to entice him from his century;
his cool grey stare
fastened me firmly in mine.
I got six overdues,
suspension of borrowing rights
and a D in Physics.
But had by heart what Archimedes proves.
Ten years later I married:
a European with cool grey eyes,
a moustache,
pigskin gloves.


‘Thirty years ago. And only yesterday,’
says Balázs, slapping at a fly.
We sit beside a bottle underneath his vines
and watch the football arc between his sons.
 
‘Check through the corner one,’ the sergeant says,
‘and make it short and sweet. Take a couple of men.’
(Seventeen-year-olds still nervous with a gun.)
It’s an office block like most
down the derelict street;
he keeps a good five metres ahead,
tries the rooms along each corridor
and beckons the two boys on.
They reach the third floor,
breathing easier now.
The Council Chamber’s here,
empty but for a tangle of chairs
at the northern window end
(unseemly three-day corpses,
wooden legs in the air);
dried into the floor – blood-stains;
and seeping through the shattered panes
the distant dialogue of cross-fire.
Directly opposite him – another door.
He notes the fact an instant before
it opens sharply and his counterpart –
the hated AVO uniform of green –
levels his gun and time is not.
They freeze. Somewhere beyond,
the seconds slide away;
between their eyes the slender lifeline holds
across the mirror of air.
‘Döntetlen barátom azt hiszem’:
Stalemate I think, my friend.
Each slightly lowers his gun
and slowly, eyes still locked, takes one step back.
The two doors close together, softly as hands on a prayer.
‘Senki sincs ott,’ each says to his men:
Nobody there.
 
‘In Hungary we used to say
Néha a második alkalom jön először –
sometimes the second chance comes first.’
He’s silent, years away.
The day is insubstantial, seems to float
in the dry gum-scented heat.
Only the football’s thud,
steady as the beat of some huge heart,
holds us in time and space.
He rouses himself to swear:
‘Az anyád, off the kohlrabi, rossz gyerekek,’
then pours us another beer.
The head on each glass whispers small talk;
we blow the froth into the air.

What is sometimes called a   
   tongue of flame 
or an arm extended burning   
   is only the long 
red and orange branch of   
   a green maple 
in early September   reaching 
   into the greenest field 
out of the green woods   at the 
   edge of which the birch trees   
appear a little tattered   tired 
   of sustaining delicacy 
all through the hot summer   re- 
   minding everyone (in   
our family) of a Russian 
   song   a story 
by Chekhov   or my father 


2 

What is sometimes called a   
   tongue of flame 
or an arm extended   burning 
   is only the long 
red and orange branch of 
   a green maple 
in early September   reaching   
   into the greenest field 
out of the green woods   at the   
   edge of which the birch trees 
appear a little tattered   tired 
   of sustaining delicacy 
all through the hot summer   re- 
   minding everyone (in   
our family) of a Russian 
   song   a story by 
Chekhov or my father on 
   his own lawn   standing   
beside his own wood in 
   the United States of   
America   saying (in Russian) 
   this birch is a lovely 
tree   but among the others 
   somehow superficial 


I went out walking 
in the old neighborhood 

Look! more trees on the block   
forget-me-nots all around them   
ivy   lantana shining 
and geraniums in the window 

Twenty years ago 
it was believed that the roots of trees 
would insert themselves into gas lines 
then fall   poisoned   on houses and children 

or tap the city’s water pipes   starved   
for nitrogen   obstruct the sewers 

In those days in the afternoon I floated   
by ferry to Hoboken or Staten Island   
then pushed the babies in their carriages   
along the river wall   observing Manhattan   
See Manhattan I cried   New York! 
even at sunset it doesn’t shine 
but stands in fire   charcoal to the waist 

But this Sunday afternoon on Mother’s Day 
I walked west   and came to Hudson Street   tricolored flags   
were flying over old oak furniture for sale 
brass bedsteads   copper pots and vases 
by the pound from India 

Suddenly before my eyes   twenty-two transvestites   
in joyous parade stuffed pillows under   
their lovely gowns 
and entered a restaurant 
under a sign which said   All Pregnant Mothers Free 

I watched them place napkins over their bellies   
and accept coffee and zabaglione 

I am especially open to sadness and hilarity   
since my father died as a child   
one week ago in this his ninetieth year



We chose this animal to be our pet. 
His indifference allowed us to sleep. 

Cat, who made your ears bend back, 
who made you lazy as quick? 

Who made you work? 
It is a wonder any sun is left. 

Still it is always so abrupt. 
Sleep like an umbrella going up, 

clumsy like a broken umbrella coming down, 
this waking, and into what? 

I did not ask to be afraid. 
I did not ask for pleasure, but there it was, 

it exfoliated at its own leisure, 
grew until it was all that was— 

The brief interruption of who I am 
interrupts and punctuates the day 

I always assumed that I would share— 
Cat who cut the sun down from the sky 

and then responsible put it up again? 
There must be one of us that you prefer.


So many forget-me-nots, with their white centers,
scattered, you'd say, if there weren't
so many everywhere, as many as the stars
last night in between the branches
above the porch, behind the house.
Was it an argument or were there just
things they had to say?
I could have faith in so many creatures—
the old setter from the neighbor yard
who follows me around the corner
and no longer, the chick with its new beak
just past breakable whose lighter top feathers
have a bit of flight, any mother bear—
you say things and the next day
it's like they don't matter, we want our faces
to alter though we don't want to get older, neither
do we want to get younger, repetition
with less knowledge is ridiculous,
just ask the Greeks, you get to keep
being a tree but without the branch
that showed the sky your starlike shape?
I don't think so. Steadiness can be useful,
but my loyalty loves a form
that will follow me through changes.
At a diagonal the dark woods
on the back slope have enough space
to walk between, not enough to hide.
He looks into them
and writes notes to his mother, she
looks into them and finds alignment,
or looks for what she wants.
She has a human skeleton on her desk.
He has a protractor. I had wishes
for both of them yesterday
but the weather has become so kindly,
so temperate, I forget what blessings
they don't think they have.



Even at my favorite coffeeshop downtown, Redford
is a hard man to feed. This morning, he picks
at his Grilled Asiago Mastercrust with a slow, disdainful frown.
Could they spare the fromage on this so-called "treat?"
He takes a sip of hazelnut coffee, then winces delicately
into the neck of his sweater vest. I bite powerfully
through my Cinnamon Frenchroll: Well, if you really don't think
you got enough—"fromage"—you should just go back up there
& tell the girl. I start on Redford's coffee while he looks glumly
at the metal napkin dispenser. Just then, the electric chime
above the door sounds. A man sweeps in & rests
his guitar case on one of the slim       café chairs.
His dark hair is arranged in a series of perpetually
break wavefronts. A small muscle jumps in his jaw
as he orders a Cinnamon Frenchroll, toasted, with cream cheese.
I lean foward, jabbing Redford with my plastic coffee wand.
Check out that guy over there I say. Intense.
Redford shrugs. I think he's Irish I say, watching the man bite
into his bagel. The instrument case hovers on the chair edge.
He could have a guitar in there, or else—a sword from the Crusades.
I press my tongue into the square-shaped hole in the lid
of my coffee cup. Listen Redford says. If we're going to be together
you have to take this. He pushes a small velvet box across the table.
What are you doing? I ask, but Redford doesn't answer.
He just looks down at the table, one hand pressed
to each of his temples. In the box is a square of chocolate
like the top of a signet ring, smooth, but edged
in something bright. It's smoked salt from Wales, Redford says.
Handmade in limited quantities. I turn the little box
in my hands. The salt sparkles like an arctic church.
I have to blink against it all.


You thought you saw me!
But you didn't.
I wear black turtlenecks.
Black panties.
Live in a tall cave!

You don't know where my cave is.
But I come out.
Every day!
To buy mustard & relish!
See what—

A man.
Walking away from me.
No good.
Smash him!
With a loud smash!
Smash his metal table and cards.
Good!

Down in my cave.
Put on my Seahawk gear!
Watch Parade of Homes.
Watch Ron Popeil put chicken & fishes
& burgers & pork & macaroni in the same
box. Hey! I can sell that
box! At school.
Where I smash the gym teacher in his head!
I don't wear my uniform.
I don't clean my locker.
I don't share my lunch with the athletes.

My lunch—mustard.
Straight from the packet.
No one sits next to me.
Keep working my skills.
Keep circling the word blood
in Macbeth.

Good.

It takes days.
It takes days.


The first lily of June opens its red mouth. 
All over the sand road where we walk 
multiflora rose climbs trees cascading 
white or pink blossoms, simple, intense 
the scene drifting like colored mist. 

The arrowhead is spreading its creamy 
clumps of flower and the blackberries 
are blooming in the thickets. Season of 
joy for the bee. The green will never 
again be so green, so purely and lushly 

new, grass lifting its wheaty seedheads 
into the wind. Rich fresh wine 
of June, we stagger into you smeared 
with pollen, overcome as the turtle 
laying her eggs in roadside sand.



Mine, says the cat, putting out his paw of darkness. 
My lover, my friend, my slave, my toy, says 
the cat making on your chest his gesture of drawing 
milk from his mother’s forgotten breasts. 

Let us walk in the woods, says the cat. 
I’ll teach you to read the tabloid of scents, 
to fade into shadow, wait like a trap, to hunt. 
Now I lay this plump warm mouse on your mat. 

You feed me, I try to feed you, we are friends, 
says the cat, although I am more equal than you. 
Can you leap twenty times the height of your body? 
Can you run up and down trees? Jump between roofs? 

Let us rub our bodies together and talk of touch. 
My emotions are pure as salt crystals and as hard. 
My lusts glow like my eyes. I sing to you in the mornings 
walking round and round your bed and into your face. 

Come I will teach you to dance as naturally 
as falling asleep and waking and stretching long, long. 
I speak greed with my paws and fear with my whiskers. 
Envy lashes my tail. Love speaks me entire, a word 

of fur. I will teach you to be still as an egg 
and to slip like the ghost of wind through the grass.

There was a church in Umbria, Little Portion, 
Already old eight hundred years ago. 
It was abandoned and in disrepair 
But it was called St. Mary of the Angels 
For it was known to be the haunt of angels, 
Often at night the country people 
Could hear them singing there. 

What was it like, to listen to the angels, 
To hear those mountain-fresh, those simple voices 
Poured out on the bare stones of Little Portion 
In hymns of joy? 
No one has told us. 
Perhaps it needs another language 
That we have still to learn, 
An altogether different language.


Through the window screen I can see an angle of grey roof 
and the silence that spreads in the branches of the pecan tree 
as the sun goes down. I am waiting for a lover. I am alone 
in a solitude that vibrates like the cicada in hot midmorning, 
that waits like the lobed sassafras leaf just before 
its dark green turns into red, that waits 
like the honeybee in the mouth of the purple lobelia. 

While I wait, I can hear the random clink of one fork 
against a plate. The woman next door is eating supper 
alone. She is sixty, perhaps, and for many years 
has eaten by herself the tomatoes, the corn 
and okra that she grows in her backyard garden. 
Her small metallic sound persists, as quiet almost 
as the windless silence, persists like the steady 
random click of a redbird cracking a few 
more seeds before the sun gets too low. 
She does not hurry, she does not linger. 

Her younger neighbors think that she is lonely. 
But I know what sufficiency she may possess. 
I know what can be gathered from year to year, 
gathered from what is near to hand, as I do 
elderberries that bend in damp thickets by the road, 
gathered and preserved, jars and jars shining 
in rows of claret red, made at times with help, 
a friend or a lover, but consumed long after, 
long after they are gone and I sit 
alone at the kitchen table. 

And when I sit in the last heat of Sunday, afternoons 
on the porch steps in the acid breath of the boxwoods, 
I also know desolation. The week is over, the coming night 
will not lift. I am exhausted from making each day. 
My family, my children live in other states, 
the women I love in other towns. I would rather be here 
than with them in the old ways, but when all that’s left 
of the sunset is the red reflection underneath the clouds, 
when I get up and come in to fix supper, 
in the darkened kitchen I am often lonely for them. 

In the morning and the evening we are by ourselves, 
the woman next door and I. Still, we persist. 
I open the drawer to get out the silverware. 
She goes to her garden to pull weeds and pick 
the crookneck squash that turn yellow with late summer. 
I walk down to the pond in the morning to watch 
and wait for the blue heron who comes at first light 
to feed on minnows that swim through her shadow in the water. 
She stays until the day grows so bright 
that she cannot endure it and leaves with her hunger unsatisfied. 
She bows her wings and slowly lifts into flight, 
grey and slate blue against a paler sky. 
I know she will come back. I see the light create 
a russet curve of land on the farther bank, 
where the wild rice bends heavy and ripe 
under the first blackbirds. I know 
she will come back. I see the light curve 
in the fall and rise of her wing. 



Shattered glass in the street at Maryland and 10th: 
smashed sand glittering on a beach of black asphalt. 

You can think of it so: or as bits of broken kaleidoscope, 
or as crystals spilled from the white throat of a geode. 

You can use metaphor to move the glass as far as possible 
from the raised hands that threw the bottle 

for their own reasons of amusement, or despair, or the desire 
to make a cymbal crash in the ears of midnight sleepers. 

Or you can use words like your needle, the probe curious 
in tough heels, your bare feet having walked in risky places. 

You can work to the surface the irritant, pain, the glass 
sliver to blink in the light, sharp as a question. 


That which installs itself in the mind embraces sound
 
Rebounding,
                         rounding the fecund earth
 
Birth, as in what is not, as in one makes one,
                                                     is a mighty absence to understand
 
(and there are those who fail to get their lessons done)
 
Dun is the color of submission
 
Unfledged, she leafs through what has been nothing never
Never to be what she is/ or could /or hope to be
Bewitched by dictions (fictions) on the surface—
 
Face naming that which she must save, polished like an apple—
 
Apple of the eye, amour of town and street, apple of the cheek
Eaten with a dab of honey for a sweet year
 
Ear to who am I in the suddenly-arriving what-comes-next
Next to being, next to delivery, next to undergone
Gone parenthetical but now revived as her eye
Spies the sudden trespass of his unexpected welcome—
 
Succumbing, coming unto him in full sun this morning
 
Mourning what she need not beguile or lie beside


. . . some days ago I saw the picture of an Angel who, in making the Annunciation,seemed to be trying to chase Mary out of her room with movements showing the sort ofattack one might make on some hated enemy; and Mary, as if desperate, seemed to betrying to throw herself out of the window. Do not fall into errors like these. 

                                                                                                — Leonardo da Vinci
It is time to speak of the lies
            of images, omissions, insertions—
 
            imitations of reality,
 
                        but whose reality, Leonardo?
 
     For you she’s in nature—
 
                 you’ve lavished so much attention
                                      on rock formations along your raised horizon
                 varieties of grass in the lawn
                 cloud convocations
 
                          and the shadow the archangel casts
            obliterating most of what’s imagined growing there
 
                        and she, lovely, composed—“great grace of shadows and of lights is added 
to the faces of those who sit” beside the darkness of brown plasterwork—her right arm
almost deformed, too far forward,
 
                        reaching out at an impossible angle—
 
                                                FOR WHAT
 
—Botticelli, Campin, van Eyck—for you
 
she’s indoors all decked out in luscious silk and satin,
surrounded by finery—tied-back drapery, carved benches,
a rug or tiled floor, loggias
and archways beyond her wildest ken
windows revealing hortus conclusi and winding paths
              slogging toward the sea

And what of all those blues and golds, so rife with wealth
 
            in her life there’s only red from madder juice
            and yellow from kaolin clay
                        and a linen shift all frayed
 
The truth also is a small opening high up on the wall
A floor that’s hard-packed dirt
And beyond the room, villagers working the fields,
donkeys dragging threshing boards over newly harvested wheat
 
            AND EVERYWHERE, INSIDE AND OUT, WORLD-MOTHETING DUST
 
                                         For all of you
this is an event reduced to a book she cannot read
a lily she does not smell
a lectern she never owned
 
She might as well comb her hair with a stiletto heel
Make of her body a cloud of white tulle
Carry a watering can and wear shapely wooden clogs
Fake glamour in a black bare-back gown
Crouch on the ground flipping coins
Pop a pogo stick between her legs and levitate
 
                          SHE COULD BE ANYONE            ANYWHERE             ANYTIME
 
 
She could be sitting in her slip, bored,
bored to death, the intercom
image appearing out of nowhere,
announcing a stranger
 
            (prima materia, take a deep breath
 
            (for divinity to enter the world,
                        your mystery must be experienced
 
Her eyes will go wide, not expecting this
 
Her ears have encountered only silence
 
            and the soft moan of a dove
                        (OOOOOOOOOOOOOOO
 
The trees thin
The cumulus sky crackles ever so quietly
Somewhere a rainbow breaks
 
            too loud now
                        too strident
 
                        He’s gotten in
 
Hail comes in pellets
            (heavy hitters
 
            She will be patient
            and hear him out
                        though what she really wants is to get back under the covers
                        that are damask, but a lie—
                                    (rough-hewn flax is what she’d have)
 
Or she could be blending a batch of myrrh
and roses to deodorize the foul
stench of the room that opens out
not on a vista of budding poplars
but on sewage,
piles of it
come to rot at the side of the road
just there, in front of her door
            where broken planks of wood lean
            and bleating sheep wait to be herded up the hill
 
But here’s this guy breezing in
 
                             (Titan, El Greco paint his feet unplanted on the ground
                                         (is he preparing for a quick getaway
                                                     or must he be higher on the picture plane
                             (Tintoretto catches him in mid-flight, a show-off, he
                             (Martini and Crivelli force him to his knees
 
The breeze may be the whisper of something
              she is in danger of losing
 
                             (the breeze may be her destiny
 
 
or his feathers could begin to moult
                             (transaction of feathers,
                             (light as a feather
                                                in the face of all that dust she can’t escape
 
or she could cringe at wings,
                                  voracious, unfurled,
trying to scoop her up, knock her down,
drown her in their soft pile,
 
snuff out any NO she stashes in her mind,
or the wind could whip his feathers
and blow the townsfolk quickly to her side
 
          (Today, she knows no one will arrive in time . . . )
 
          Certainly not those people tending their gardens,
                      (as if anyone had topiary trees
                               as Rogier van der Weyden (possibly Memling) shows
 
                                                (read fields of barley and wheat
                                                              and plows, plenty of plows
 
In his eyes, pools of light map no pollution, only flame
In hers, no flecks, no threads mar the cobalt calm
 
            until his hail scumbles their surface
 
            What is she to make of it
 
Her lids lower
 
Chrysalises, her eyes close on their private dusk
                        (she’s already seen her share of Roman crucifixions
 
            (perhaps the future is there and her eyes seek the great above
                             where son and mother will be united
            (perhaps she conjugates the months—
                                              (nine is real—
                                  (a number done on her
 
            (perhaps she dabbles with using rue to end the thing
 
                                              SHE’S GOT A CHOICE AFTER ALL
 
 
For the child she will have boundless love
 
For posterity the memory of being
 
For her life no proper translation


There is a button on the remote control called FAV. You can program your favorite channels. Don’t like the world you live in, choose one closer to the world you live in. I choose the independent film channel and HBO. Neither have news programs as far as I can tell. This is what is great about America—anyone can make these kinds of choices. Instead of the news, HBO has The Sopranos. This week the indie channel is playing and replaying Spaghetti Westerns. Always someone gets shot or pierced through the heart with an arrow, and just before he dies he says, I am not going to make it. Where? Not going to make it where? On some level, maybe, the phrase simply means not going to make it into the next day, hour, minute, or perhaps the next second. Occasionally, you can imagine, it means he is not going to make it to Carson City or Texas or somewhere else out west or to Mexico if he is on the run. On another level always implicit is the sense that it means he is not going to make it to his own death. Perhaps in the back of all our minds is the life expectancy for our generation. Perhaps this expectation lingers there alongside the hours of sleep one should get or the number of times one is meant to chew food—eight hours, twenty chews, and seventy-six years. We are all heading there and not to have that birthday is not to have made it.

A father tells his son the thing he regrets most about his life is the amount of time he has spent worrying about it.
   
Worry 1. A dog’s action of biting and shaking an animal so as to injure or kill it, spec., a hound’s worrying of its quarry; an instance of this. 2. A state or feeling of mental unease or anxiety regarding or arising from one’s cares or responsibilities, uncertainty about the future, fear of failure, etc.; anxious concern, anxiety. Also, an instance or cause of this.

It achieved nothing, all his worrying. Things worked out or they didn’t work out and now here he was, an old man, an old man who each year of his life bit or shook doubt as if to injure if not to kill, an old man with a good-looking son who resembles his deceased mother. It is uncanny how she rests there, as plain as day, in their boy's face.
   
Worry 8. Cause mental distress or agitation to (a person, oneself); make anxious and ill at ease. 9. Give way to anxiety, unease, or disquietude: allow one’s mind to dwell on difficulties or troubles.

He waits for his father’s death. His father has been taken off the ventilator and clearly will not be able to breathe for himself much longer. Earlier in the day the nurse mentioned something about an electroencephalogram (EEG), which measures brain waves in the cerebral hemispheres, the parts of the brain that deal with speech and memory. But his brain stem is damaged; it seems now the test will not be necessary. The son expects an almost silent, hollow gasp to come from the old man’s open mouth. Those final sounds, however, are nothing like the wind moving through the vacancy of a mind. The release is jerky and convulsive. There is never the rasp or the choke the son expects, though one meaning of worry is to be choked on, to choke on.


What's the bird ratio overhead? 
Zero: zero. Maybe it's El Niño? 

The storm, was it bad? 
Here the worst ever. Every tree hurt. 

Do you love trees? 
Only the gingko, the fir, the birch. 

Yours? Do you name your trees? 
Who owns the trees? Who's talking 

You presume a dialogue. Me and You. 
Yes. Your fingers tap. I'm listening. 

Will you answer? Why mention trees? 
When the weather turned rain into ice, the leaves failed. 

So what? Every year leaves fail. The cycle. Birth to death. 
In the night the sound of cannon, and death everywhere. 

What did you see? 
Next morning, roots against the glass. 

Who's talking now and in familiar language? Get real. 
What's real is the broken crown. The trunk shattered. 

Was that storm worse than others? 
Yes and no. The wind's torque twisted open the tree's tibia. 

Fool. You're talking about vegetables. Do you love the patio 
   tomato? The Christmas cactus? 
Yes. And the magnolia on the roof, the felled crabapple, the topless 
   spruce.


New life! Will he toe out like Dolly, like John? Will her eyes be fires? 
Blue and green, like Papa's, the ocean at the shore? 
Will she sing in the bath? Play piano in her diapers? 
Will her heart leap at large machinery? Will he say, "Dribe dribe," 
to his daddy, entering the tunnel? Will his hair be red? Will her hair curl? 
Will her little face have the circumflex eyebrows of her mother? 
   The pointed chin? 
Her hair be fair, bright blonde? Will she frown at the light by the river? 
Oh, let her head fill with Greek Owls, her mouth with honey wine. 
Let his hands cup the keys, the air of the studio filling with sound, the crunch of 
cornflakes, the sift of raw sugar on the tongue, the great chords. 

And let the parents be fierce forever, Lord, as You are, exacting 
price and penalty for Your gifts, so they grow strong and joyous, 
blessed by the memory of the black car, open to air, 
chosen by a child in token of the power they give over, 
their lives in service to new life, the great melt of petals under snow, the green rising.

If endear is earned 
and is meant to identify   
two halves 

then it composes   
one meaning 

which means   
a token 

a knot   
a note 

a noting in the head   
of how it feels 

to have your heart   
be the dear one


The only thing under the sun 
I can run to 
is Ecclesiastes 

for there is nothing gathered into one self 
that can be kept 

Want is humbled by death 
as every purpose manifests it 

Feeling this all my life 
a piercing fright 
gathers in the stomach's pit 

This is it and this is not the end 
of the road 

for even despair is a kind of goad 
to wisdom 

The beauty of the world 
over one's own anguish 

The day that I lost all feeling 

I was both a Fool and a Goddess

there is ghazal swimming inside of her, wanting to be born. on the matter of foretelling, of small miracles, cactus flowers in bloom on this city fire escape, where inside your tongue touches every inch of her skin, where you lay your hand on her belly and sleep. here, she fingers the ornate remains of ancient mosques. here, some mythic angel will rise from the dust of ancestors’ bones. this is where you shall worship, at the intersections of distilled deities and memory’s sharp edges. the country is quite a poetic place; water and rock contain verse and metaphor, even wild grasses reply in rhyme. you are not broken. she knows this having captured a moment of lucidity; summer lightning bugs, sun’s rays in a jelly jar.
 
this is not a love poem, but a cove to escape the flux, however momentary. she is still a child, confabulating the fantastic; please do not erode her wonder for the liquid that is your language. there is thunderstorm in her chest, wanting to burst through her skin. this is neither love poem nor plea. this is not river, nor stone.
 

she whispers desert trees, thorn-ridged, trickling yellow candles; roots spilling snakes’ blood
virgin of ribboned silk; virgin of gold filigree
one day’s walk westward, a crucifix of fisherman’s dinghy dimensions washes ashore
virgin adorned in robe of shark embryo and coconut husk
she fingers mollusks, wraps herself in sea vines 
virgin of ocean voyage peril
she will herself born
virgin of mud brick ruins; virgin of sandstorm echoes
she is saint of commonplaces; saint of badlands
virgin of jade, camphor, porcelain; virgin of barter for ghosts
penitents, earthdivers of forgotten names praying skyward
virgin of scars blossomed from open veins of fire
she slips across the pacific’s rivers of pearldiving children
virgin of copper coins
she is bloodletting words, painting unlikeness
virgin of anachronism
children stained with berries and rust, their skeletons bend, arrow-tipped; smoke blurs eyes’ edges
virgin of mineral depletion; virgin of mercury
at other altitudes she remembers to breathe; a monument scraping cloud
virgin of tin deposits extracted from mountains
these are not divinations; there is goldleaf about her skin
virgin of naming and renaming places in between


Thinking of Caroline Herschel (1750—1848) 
astronomer, sister of William; and others.
A woman in the shape of a monster   
a monster in the shape of a woman   
the skies are full of them 

a woman      ‘in the snow 
among the Clocks and instruments   
or measuring the ground with poles’ 

in her 98 years to discover   
8 comets 

she whom the moon ruled   
like us 
levitating into the night sky   
riding the polished lenses 

Galaxies of women, there 
doing penance for impetuousness   
ribs chilled   
in those spaces    of the mind 

An eye, 

          ‘virile, precise and absolutely certain’ 
          from the mad webs of Uranusborg 

                                                            encountering the NOVA   

every impulse of light exploding 

from the core 
as life flies out of us 

             Tycho whispering at last 
             ‘Let me not seem to have lived in vain’ 

What we see, we see   
and seeing is changing 

the light that shrivels a mountain   
and leaves a man alive 

Heartbeat of the pulsar 
heart sweating through my body 

The radio impulse   
pouring in from Taurus 

         I am bombarded yet         I stand 

I have been standing all my life in the   
direct path of a battery of signals 
the most accurately transmitted most   
untranslatable language in the universe 
I am a galactic cloud so deep      so invo- 
luted that a light wave could take 15   
years to travel through me       And has   
taken      I am an instrument in the shape   
of a woman trying to translate pulsations   
into images    for the relief of the body   
and the reconstruction of the mind.

on a day when
we were dark
and not so full of
light
we met
    what did we find?
nothing.
everything, when we closed
our eyes
which anyway
had never been open.

once, we thought we
loved each other
       who can reverse
    time?
we tried.
we stepped out
of space
into some new
step of distance
and fell—
and not in love.



child,
in the august of your life
you come barefoot to me
the blisters of events
having worn through to the
soles of your shoes.

it is not the time
this is not the time

there is no such time
to tell you
that some pains ease away
on the ebb & toll of
themselves.
there is no such dream that
can not fail, nor is hope our
only conquest.
we can stand boldly in burdening places (like earth here)
in our blunderings, our bloomings
our palms, flattened upward or pressed,
an unyielding down.

In a landscape of having to repeat. 
Noticing that she does, that he does and so on. 
The underlying cause is as absent as rain. 
Yet one remembers rain even in its absence and an attendant quiet.   
If illusion descends or the very word you’ve been looking for. 
He remembers looking at the photograph, 
green and gray squares, undefined. 
How perfectly ordinary someone says looking at the same thing or   
I’d like to get to the bottom of that one. 
When it is raining it is raining for all time and then it isn’t 
and when she looked at him, as he remembers it, the landscape moved closer   
than ever and she did and now he can hardly remember what it was like.

The song is Gaelic now,
peridot words
the color of fresh
timothy gathered
by red-haired women;
or the song 
is the bony white oak
and rhythm of Miwu,
a knowing that breathes
against angles of granite
and meets the ground
in a flurry of sound.
Or the song rides down from a star
over burgundy boulders
beneath a dazzling blue sky
to find the old words
buried deep in the earth.

But this heart listens.
This song. Hi-tsah-tsi-nah,
the precious rain awakening.

On this you come
as a prayer in the flesh,
on this you ride
with the roll and rollick
of rattlesnake.
On this you sing
volcanic birthing words
and obsidian cools where
the blood bubbles down.

          Oh look, a little girl is lost
          although she stands close
          to her mother’s heart.
          With great energy she scrapes
          the missionaries from her ribs.
          Shoulder blades curve
          around the spine
          and the pestle dances,
          acorns flying,
          and dust collects
          in the creases
          of her hands. Or

     she is kneeling in a small room
     at the edge of the mesa,
     polished black bone of earth,
     cherished piki stone,
     moving back and forth
     this act of love, grinding
     the corn until it is dark,
     brushing the white cornmeal
     into one basket, the blue
     into another, thinking already
     of the daughters she will bear
     glowing in the sun.

Or she is standing at the bog
inside a mountain meadow,
hands raised up to tie back her hair
with a thin red rag; seeds loosen
and cling to her shoes, her stockings,
her long skirt, her skin.
She fearlessly walks
through gold fiddleneck,
small mountain lupines, clouds
of white popcorn flowers fallen upward
out of the ground
to cover the hillside
like snow. Or
          a woman gathers loop after loop
          of heavy rope to guide the head
          of the horse she straddles and sometimes
          she is the mare and the soft sandstone
          and the hot rocks rolling in acorn soup,
          trying to heal the gash spread across her path
          where the crescent moon has sliced the earth.
          Ocean to mountain to mesa, the bundle she carries
          is a sacred memory, a rainbow that arches
          from one side of the sky to the other.

Or a woman is closing
a steamer trunk, has to sit on it hard
to get the latch through and
the leather buckled; seagulls dive
outside the wall of the ship, she
hears their demands, maybe one
has come inside to brush her cheek
with its pointed wing or maybe
just another tear warmed by cooling blood.

How she aches in the cold, she is so thin;
and when she pulls the blanket around her
and lies down on the floor, she is no more
than a pile of old rags, a few sticks of firewood,
a broken broom. Steady against the roll of the sea
she is patient as the rocks that wait for the ship
along a northern corridor, angry as the storms
midway across the Atlantic that shake their fists
at those who must leave home, and as deeply hidden
as the icebergs that threaten to disembowl.
She has already seen the world dissolve;
now she feels the breaking
of one last thread
to ancestral land,
feels the very break
of it.


From morning’s mouth
the bones emerge,
a prayer is whispered
over rounded horns;
the prairie is beyond
the quivering hump
and holy smoke sparkles
released in the breath.
Braided sweetgrass,
be about their hooves;
although the grip of hunger
lies heavy on the land,
let endless native grasses grow
among the yellow stones
and between the stars. 
Even if only one man had 
begun to sing, actually
it was thousands, She who came
to Wisconsin farmers
and transformed their lives,
She who brought her blessing
in the form of being newborn,
She whom they named the Miracle,
White Buffalo Calf Maiden must return
amid the fast firing of bullets, along
the most perilous of paths. Rock stars,
millionaires, they all offered millions of dollars
to struggling white farmers
but she had begun her transformation and her prophecy
by touching them and they came to understand
if not the actual words to the prayers
at least the reverence, the need
to protect, to keep the doors open.
Like it was a hundred years ago
bounties are gathered from death;
trains, buses, cars, planes
carry the segmented body of the terrible worm
across the land and the screams of the hunted
split the sun awake. It is time to restore
the stolen beads and shards,
the bones and knives to every grave.
And the graves are graves no longer but wombs;
the bounties burn their hands
and bones come flowing
from museum shelves
to dance in the rippling grass,
rebuilding lungs, starting hearts.
                                              There must be a hundred men
                                              and a hundred men’s worth
                                              of heartlessness; wished they could find
                                              Indians to kill but now that is illegal
                                              so they make up some excuse
                                              to raise their rifles and take aim,
                                              not hearing the rumble
                                              of buffalo prayer, not feeling
                                              tomorrow tremble
                                              or the prophecy of Miracle,
                                              and smile as they see the legs give way,
                                              the horns gouge open the prairie ground,
                                              Earth betrayed again.


It is the fish that bring them first.
Cod in such numbers as to seem endless.
Cod to fill the nets and bellies of hungry
Europeans with the tender white flesh.
Cod, it seems to them, without end.

They fill the ships,
salting the fish
down in barrels,
til the hull is full,
and head back home. This wet
cod-fishing goes on for
years, far out in the Banks,
with only an occasional stop on land.

We dry our fish in the sun
cure it in smoke-houses
and sure enough, the
foreigners hear
about it.

Soon they need
a land base
to dry the cod
which weighs less
than when wet
tastes better, too

it is these dreams 
of cod that 
first bring
the French
to land

dreams 
of cod 
the gold
of the sea
that will 
fill their bellies
and their
pockets


. . . for Donna and John

they find what looks like
a grave
what looks like a grave
a grave and they 
dig it up
they find a grave
it looks like
a grave 
and they dig
it up
they dig it up the grave
it looks like they
dig it up and 
they dig it up and 
it looks like 
a grave and
they 
dig it up

from the waist–so that, turned the bulb that's oneself (thorax) 
–only–then–doesn't have any existence–turned (wherever one 
turns) 
    as conception–at waist of magnolia buds that exist in the day 
really 
    sewing the black silk irises–not when one turned at waist 
    sewing them, they have no shape literally except being that– 
from one's hand (being, in the air) 
    the irises only had existence in the black, before dawn, in fact 
    a man doesn't want me to become quiet again–go into ocean 
not weighed of before fighting–ever 

    formation of that of narrowed to no form in one–of black volup- 
tuous lip–outside–voluptuous lips that (aren't) on black dawn, or 
before it when it's black. 
    There was no intention–being done–with their existing. 

    not weighed before fighting which is the black, weighed, air– 
not the lips which have no weight–isn't following 
    if one's not contending...so the inner isn't contending either...?



walking person who has sky flowing–by one who beside is as if 
being backward by walking in life of people? but of one being 'defense- 
less' by the huge–is elating which is time. 

    'I was by a bigger bird - inside' - walking 

    walking by (someone with the sky flowing) disturbed by being– 
by it– 
    (compared by being–to past event: man seeing red tail hawk sit- 
ting in the city beside smaller bird disturbed calling)–(one walking 
by someone)–beside is 'embarrassing as being action' in one– 
(from)(its)(in the) present. 
    'embarrassed' is being elated simply here (as:) with one.



This is everything she ever closed a door 
on, the broom closet of childhood 
where no one could ever find a broom. 
Here, layer upon layer, nothing breathes: 
photo albums curl at the edges, books 
she brought home from the library 
where she worked, handled by thousands 
of other hands before their final exile 
where they’ve waited, paper and more paper 
taking in the ocean air, about to sprout. 

Mother’s sitting on the bed 
with her tattered list of dispersals—who gets 
what among the treasures she hopes 
I’ll find, but I know I’m seeing 
what she doesn't want me to see, 
the daughter cleaning doing what the son 
would never do. After an hour of excavation 
the console TV emerges from beneath 
forgotten sweaters and balled up nylons 
saved for stuffing puppets, a long ago church project— 
the TV arrived in 1966 same day I crushed 
the fender of the car, upsetting 
the careful plans she’d made for payment. 

She wants to leave so much behind. Hours later 
I’ve found nothing I want but the purple mache mask 
I made in the fourth grade. I like its yellow eyes. 
She looks at each magazine I remove, saving 
every word about my brother, the coach. He’s sixty 
and a long dead mouse has eaten the laces 
of his baby shoes. I want order. I say 
I’m old myself, I’ve started throwing things away. 
I’m lying. I’ve kept everything she’s ever given me.


There is another way to enter an apple: 
a worm’s way. 
The small, round door 
closes behind her. The world 
and all its necessities 
ripen around her like a room. 

In the sweet marrow of a bone, 
the maggot does not remember 
the wingspread 
of the mother, the green 
shine of her body, nor even 
the last breath of the dying deer. 

I, too, have forgotten 
how I came here, breathing 
this sweet wind, drinking rain, 
encased by the limits 
of what I can imagine 
and by a husk of stars.



--The former President lost his temper. Loss of content in our public life. Only forms remain, intonation, affect. Why did you  yell in my mom’s house? Radhika asks our neighbor.

--She sounded like she does when her hands shake. She does not want to be there. Bryant calls to ask about her things. A tape on osteoperosis. No. Foundations of Economics (from the 1930s). No. The Soviet shelf. No. The Nazi shelf. No. The Greeks, the Moslems. No. The speech and drama shelf. No. Encyclopedias, no. Check reigsters back to 1964. No. Harry Truman, no. Mrs. Ike, no.

--Was her reading too intense? 

--Grief is excess of sound. Anger is excess of form. Sadness can lack, or still exceed. Excess is overtone, the note beyond the note you sound. Without the tone, there is no object. Did I kill Bin Laden? No. But I tried.

--My task is to inventory sentences, place them in order, box them up and ship them in a container. They are a sturdy furniture, haphazard art. They are boxes of papers, bills, pieces of a dissertation. A computer shopper magazine (discard). Titles whose aura was a life, or two, or three. The house is now full of light. A girl wanders through the rooms, trying keys at the windows. My mother knows none of this.

--My father might be in the garden, or the scarecrow that wears his hat. Let him wander the house this last, inspect the plumbing, lights, air conditioning, the rows of beans, sort through medals, papers, release them as excess.

posted by Susan at 12:44 PM 0 comments


8 a.m. 

--Mom is wearing a Kailua Surfriders Staff teeshirt this morning. That must be Bryant’s old shirt. No, she insists, it’s an Iowa teeshirt. The young man down the street, the one she’s never met, gave her an Iowa teeshirt when he heard she’d gone to Iowa. It’s Iowa.

--I didn’t know she was coming today.

--She was sweet at 4 a.m., Bryant says. They had the first conversation about the shirt then.

--Israel sends more ground troops into Lebanon. There’s an opportunity there, we read in the Washington Post.

--I don’t like you. I don’t like them. I don’t like them either. And Susan? She laughs.

--Compare and contrast the acquisition of a language to its loss. Avoid the trap of merely saying that the latter happens in reverse order of the former. You are likely to do better if you see them as similar processes, though one leads to gain, the other loss. Think chemistry. Think performance of a script. Think Harold and the Purple Crayon. Think Harold Pinter.

--Think two old men fishing for a beautiful young woman in a lake. Think one of them might get “lucky.”

--When are you leaving? Where are you going? Are you taking the kids?

--Sangha and May hatch plots of their own. Go quiet when I arrive. In this life, you either make plots or have them hatched around you. Like eggs. Like poisoned ones.

posted by Susan at 6:46 AM 0 comments


My father had our yard cemented over.
He couldn’t tell a flower from a weed.
The neighbors let their backyards run to clover
and some grew dappled gardens from a seed,

but he preferred cement to rampant green. 
Lushness reeked of anarchy’s profusion. 
Better to tamp the wildness down, unseen,
than tolerate its careless brash intrusion.

The grass interred, he felt well satisfied:
his first house, and he took an owner’s pride, 
surveying the uniform, cemented yard.
Just so, he labored to cement his heart.


White people leave the express
at 96th Street, collectively,
like pigeons from a live wire
or hope from the hearts of Harlem.
And I’m one of them, although
my lover sleeps two stops north between
Malcolm X and Adam Clayton Powell
Boulevards, wishing my ass
were cupped inside her knees and belly,
wishing this in a dream thick
with inequalities.
 
I live on Riverside Drive. My face
helped get me here. I was
ruddy with anticipation the day
I interviewed for the rooms
near the park with its
snow-covered maples. I was full
of undisguised hope as I
strolled along the river, believing
I belonged there, that my people
inherited this wonderland
unequivocally, as if they deserved it.
 
My lover buys twinkies from the Arabs,
bootleg tapes on ‘25th,
and carries a blade in her back
pocket although her hands
are the gentlest I’ve known.
She ignores the piss smells
on the corner, the sirens
at 4 A.M., the men whose brains
have dissolved in rum. And tries
to trust a white woman who
sleeps near the trees of Riverside.
 
When we go out together,
we avoid expensive 
cafés on Columbus Avenue, jaunts
to the Upper East Side. Harlem
eyes us suspiciously or with
contempt beneath half-closed lids.
We have friends there,
hidden in the ruins like gold, who
accept us. When it snows,
we walk boldly anywhere, as if the snow
were a protection, or a death.


There's a structure for idiocy—lamplight—
all over the nation; it's an illumination
with such sheer creative force it is misrecognized genius.
I have misunderstood people's duplicitous ways—their lightbulbs—
as righteous forms of complexity;
not calculated obfuscations.
Much like the voice in a poem that insists it sing
the most important seer of light.
Am I providing this luxury as well?
Or is this my radical assertion in order to
call into question what an aesthetic authority looks like?
(That's my problem with the poem these days.)

(The light in my office flickers on and off—the lamp is broken.)
I see no enlightenment here, much like I see my acquaintances:
bright lights and night lights.
The fragility of the intellectual is the same as the poet's:
It's all about the I and its desperate sense of the we.

more so than we did before, but now we know what to do with them. 
We hang our troubles on them and wipe our shoes against them. 
We go lethargic on the porch, we tear the bark with spindly fingers. 
We soak up the sun with restless hunger. 
So much sky we say in unison, where does it go, do we follow it? Do we let it get away? 
For months we splay without a fence, door wide open—
blue and brash inside and out. Because we can, we keep saying, because we can. 
We face a lush sense of life that we have nothing to do with. 
We face our cravings and journey with a new kind, our new people; 
They all possess smiles and frowns, but more windswept 
expressions—no permanent downwardness of spirit, 
the way it was back east. 
And since we've left the city to be ourselves, 
we still must face our needy souls—
full of want, compulsions.
Were we proud of this? The way we turned away? 

But we've protected these habits, forgone others in return. 
What is the profession of the culture-hoarder? 
Who are the gatekeepers? Do we grace them with our backs? 
Moreover our chests remain empty yet seductively warmed, 
burning by the fire, our asses cold and exposed.
All the wood, crisp birch to shield our lazy lobes, rounded bodies, 
our cerebrums and other parts.
Are we awaiting cheerless ambivalence to greet us in the West? 
Cavernous and cloudless, unaffected by beauty. Let's be petulant, 
this is us now, we say. We can't help but find ourselves lustful; 
crying alligator tears with pails to our eyes, we didn't know we were here
we kept saying, we don't know how it happened. We thought and thought, 
and finally we closed our doors on the trees 
to hide what we grew temperate for 
but resolve didn't find us, 
not alive with force, we flew out of their arms.

I don’t like what the moon is supposed to do. 
Confuse me, ovulate me, 

spoon-feed me longing. A kind of ancient 
date-rape drug. So I’ll howl at you, moon, 

I’m angry. I’ll take back the night. Using me to 
swoon at your questionable light, 

you had me chasing you, 
the world’s worst lover, over and over 

hoping for a mirror, a whisper, insight. 
But you disappear for nights on end 

with all my erotic mysteries 
and my entire unconscious mind. 

How long do I try to get water from a stone? 
It’s like having a bad boyfriend in a good band. 

Better off alone. I’m going to write hard 
and fast into you, moon, face-fucking. 

Something you wouldn’t understand. 
You with no swampy sexual 

promise but what we glue onto you. 
That’s not real. You have no begging 

cunt. No panties ripped off and the crotch 
sucked. No lacerating spasms 

sending electrical sparks through the toes. 
Stars have those. 

What do you have? You’re a tool, moon. 
Now, noon. There’s a hero. 

The obvious sun, no bullshit, the enemy 
of poets and lovers, sleepers and creatures. 

But my lovers have never been able to read 
my mind. I’ve had to learn to be direct. 

It’s hard to learn that, hard to do. 
The sun is worth ten of you. 

You don’t hold a candle 
to that complexity, that solid craze. 

Like an animal carcass on the road at night, 
picked at by crows, 

taunting walkers and drivers. Your face 
regularly sliced up by the moving 

frames of car windows. Your light is drawn, 
quartered, your dreams are stolen. 

You change shape and turn away, 
letting night solve all night’s problems alone.


It’s easy to make more of myself by eating, 
and sometimes easy’s the thing. 

To be double-me, half the trouble 
but not lonely. 

Making cakes to celebrate any old day. 
Eating too much: the emperor of being used. 

Nature, mature and feminized, 
naturalizes me naturally by creating 

the feeling of being a natural woman, 
like a sixteen-year-old getting knocked up 

again. To solve that problem, 
there’s the crispness of not eating, 

a pane of glass with a bloody-edged 
body, that is, having the baby at the prom 

undetected and, in a trance of self-preservation, 
throwing it away in the girls’ room trash. 

Buried under paper towels, silent. 
Nothing could be better, for the teenager. 

For me, starving, that coreless, useful feeling, 
is not making myself smaller 

but making myself bigger, inside. 
It’s prince and pauper both, it’s starving artist 

and good model in one masterpiece. 
It rhymes with marveling and that’s no accident. 

Fullness is dullness. Dreaming’s too easy. 
But sometimes I don’t care. 

Sometimes I put in just the right amount, 
but then I’m the worst kinds of patsy, a chump 

giving myself over to myself like a criminal 
to the law, with nothing to show for it. 

No reward, no news, no truth. 
It’s too sad to be so ordinary every day. 

Like some kind of employee. 
Being told what to do. Chop off a finger 

to plant in fertilizer (that is, in used animal 
food), to grow a finger tree. 

More fingers for me. Stop saying finger. 
I’m the one in charge here. 

Stop the madness and just eat the mirror. 
Put it in sideways or crush it 

into a powder. It doesn’t hurt and it works. 
Mouth full, don’t talk. 

Nothing to say. I’ll be a whole new person. 
I’ll make her myself. Then we’ll walk away. 

We’ll say to each other how she’s changed. 
How we wouldn’t have recognized us.


The wind is fitful now:
soot piles in the corners 
of new buildings, 
gulls stumble out of place 
in ragged branches 
to skim against a rise 
of pond water.

The children watch, breathless 
with the birds. 
They feel an emanation 
from this shuddering place.

This winter evening
the sky cracks with cardinal color
and we sit in cooing wonder
like dwarves at the Venetian court
must have done —
amazed at Tiepolo's sunshot ceilings;
like us, they were fickle,
aware of smaller inconstancy.
But the dazzle above, enclosing
seems fit or made for this
fragment of belief.

This is what it's like:
you sit in the white room
singular, knees together
arms over your head
to break the noise from the radio
that is false as a drunk's promise
to loan you his car next week.

Of course next week never comes
lies continue, nobody disbelieves them
but some are ready for the real story
the young man involved breaks her tired heart
it's the usual: spilt liquor,
broken dishes, wrecked cars.

Sun
slant low,
chill seeps into black
water. No more days of bugs
and basking. Last breath, last sight
of light and down I go, into the mud. Every
year, here, I sink and settle, shuttered like a
shed.  Inside, my eyes close, my heart slows
to its winter rhythm.  Goodbye, good-
bye! Remember the warmth. 
Remember the quickness.
Remember me.
Remember.
 
I grow in places
others can’t,
 
where wind is high
and water scant.
 
I drink the rain,
I eat the sun;
 
before the prairie winds
I run.
 
I see, I sprout,
I grow, I creep,
 
and in the ice
and snow, I sleep.
 
On steppe or veld
or pampas dry,
 
beneath the grand,
enormous sky,
 
I make my humble,
bladed bed.
 
And where there’s level ground,
I spread. 

Hugging you takes some practice.
So I'll start out with a cactus.

Marvelous Opaque Orb. Night-light for the world.


           Today the moon sees fit to come between a parched earth
    and sun, hurrying the premature darkness. A rooster in the yard
            cuts off its crowing, fooled into momentary sleep.
               And soon the Perseid showers, broken bits
         of the ancient universe, will pass through the skin of our
            atmosphere. Time and space are alive over our city.
 
       Final eclipse of the sun, last of this millennium, our city’s
        brightness broken off. We have known other dark hours:
            Here, coffin that slowly passes, I give you my sprig
        of lilac—Lincoln’s death, winding procession toward sleep.
          We have known slave coffles and holding pens in yards
       not half a mile from our Capitol, wooden palings sunk in earth
 
       to guarantee none would escape. In this freest city. Oh if earth
              could talk. Earth does talk in the neatly framed yards
                where death thinks to lay us down to rest. Asleep,
                the marker stones. But not the voices, jagged bits
                of memory, shards of poems. Sterling Brown. Our
           human possessions and all they've left us. This whole city
 
                  sings their songs. Say their names. In this city
               they are our monuments: Frederick Douglass, our
             Rayford Logan, Alain Locke, Franklin Frazier, Georgia
       Douglas Johnson, Paul Laurence Dunbar, May Miller: Not sleep
        but garlands left to us. Montague Cobb, William Hastie. Yards
                 of names. And here, the place where we unearth
 
             an immigrant father of seven. He leans down—no earthly
           reason for his choice—to pick up his nearest child. A yard-long
             rack of brooms behind him, a bin of apples. Not the sleep
                   of cold, but autumn in Washington. 1913 or a bit
               later. He stands awkwardly on 4 1/2 Street, S. W. Our
                street photographer, who’s just come by with his city
 
              chatter, ducks beneath a dark cloth. Monuments of the city
         behind him, he leans over his black box camera in time to capture
                       that moment when the child will play her bit
      part, pushing away from her father like a boat from shore. In the sleep
         of winter, years later, she will become my mother. What yardstick
                 by which to measure importance? To measure earthly
 
     agency? Each of us has monuments in the bone case of memory. Earth-    
 bound, I take my sac of marble and carry it down lonely city streets where our
generals on horseback and a tall bearded man keep watch over all their citizens.

“The orgasm has replaced the cross as the focus of longing and the image of fulfillment.” 
—Malcolm Muggeridge, 1966
I.

Hubbie 1 used to get wholly pissed when I made   
myself come. I’m right here!, he’d sputter, blood   
popping to the surface of his fuzzed cheeks,   
goddamn it, I’m right here! By that time, I was   
in no mood to discuss the myriad merits of my   
pointer, or to jam the brakes on the express train   
slicing through my blood, It was easier to suffer   
the practiced professorial huff, the hissed invectives   
and the cold old shoulder, liver-dotted, quaking   
with rage. Shall we pause to bless professors and   
codgers and their bellowed, unquestioned ownership   
of things? I was sneaking time with my own body. 
I know I signed something over, but it wasn’t that. 


II.

No matter how I angle this history, it’s weird, 
so let’s just say Bringing Up Baby was on the telly   
and suddenly my lips pressing against 
the couch cushions felt spectacular and I thought   
wow this is strange, what the hell, I’m 30 years old,   
am I dying down there is this the feel, does the cunt   
go to heaven first, ooh, snapped river, ooh shimmy   
I had never had it never knew, oh i clamored and   
lurched beneath my little succession of boys I cried   
writhed hissed, ooh wee, suffered their flat lapping 
and machine-gun diddling their insistent c’mon girl   
c’mon until I memorized the blueprint for drawing   
blood from their shoulders, until there was nothing   
left but the self-satisfied liquidy snore of he who has   
rocked she, he who has made she weep with script.   
But this, oh Cary, gee Katherine, hallelujah Baby, 
the fur do fly, all gush and kaboom on the wind. 


III.

Don’t hate me because I am multiple, hurtling. 
As long as there is still skin on the pad of my finger,   
as long as I’m awake, as long as my (new) husband’s   
mouth holds out, I am the spinner, the unbridled,   
the bellowing freak. When I have emptied him, 
he leans back, coos, edges me along, keeps wondering   
count. He falls to his knees in front of it, marvels   
at my yelps and carousing spine, stares unflinching   
as I bleed spittle unto the pillows. 
He has married a witness. 
My body bucks, slave to its selfish engine, 
and love is the dim miracle of these little deaths,   
fracturing, speeding for the surface. 


IV.

We know the record. As it taunts us, we have giggled,   
considered stopwatches, little laboratories. Somewhere   
beneath the suffering clean, swathed in eyes and silver,   
she came 134 times in one hour. I imagine wires holding   
her tight, her throat a rattling window. Searching scrubbed   
places for her name, I find only reams of numbers. I ask   
the quietest of them: 


V.

Are we God?


nodding tho' the lamps lit low 
nodding for passers underground 
to and fro she's darning and 
the yarn is weeping red and pale 
marking the train stops from algiers 

sleeping tho' the eyes are pale 
hums in rhythum w/a bonnet on 
lullaby a broken song 
the sifting-cloth is bleeding red 
weeping yarn from algiers 

lullaby tho' baby's gone 
the cradle rocks a barren song 
she's rocking w/her ribbons on 
she's rocking yarn and needles oh 
it's long coming from algiers


Oh Raphael. Guardian angel. In love and crime 
all things move in sevens. seven compartments 
in the heart. the seven elaborate temptations. 
seven devils cast from Mary Magdalene whore 
of Christ. the seven marvelous voyages of Sinbad. 
sin/bad. And the number seven branded forever 
on the forehead of Cain. The first inspired man. 
The father of desire and murder. But his was not 
the first ecstasy. Consider his mother. 

Eve's was the crime of curiosity. As the saying 
goes: it killed the pussy. One bad apple spoiled 
the whole shot. But be sure it was no apple. 
An apple looks like an ass. It's fags' fruit. 
It must have been a tomato. 
Or better yet. A mango. 
She bit. Must we blame her. abuse her. 
poor sweet bitch. perhaps there's more to the story. 
think of Satan as some stud. 
maybe her knees were open. 
satan snakes between them. 
they open wider 
snakes up her thighs 
rubs against her for a while 
more than the tree of knowledge was about 
to be eaten...she shudders her first shudder 
pleasure pleasure garden 
was she sorry 
are we ever girls 
was she a good lay 
god only knows


There will be no edges, but curves.
Clean lines pointing only forward.

History, with its hard spine & dog-eared
Corners, will be replaced with nuance,

Just like the dinosaurs gave way
To mounds and mounds of ice.

Women will still be women, but
The distinction will be empty. Sex,

Having outlived every threat, will gratify
Only the mind, which is where it will exist.

For kicks, we'll dance for ourselves
Before mirrors studded with golden bulbs.

The oldest among us will recognize that glow—
But the word sun will have been re-assigned

To the Standard Uranium-Neutralizing device
Found in households and nursing homes.

And yes, we'll live to be much older, thanks
To popular consensus. Weightless, unhinged,

Eons from even our own moon, we'll drift
In the haze of space, which will be, once

And for all, scrutable and safe.



The first track still almost swings. High hat and snare, even
A few bars of sax the stratosphere will singe-out soon enough.

Synthesized strings. Then something like cellophane
Breaking in as if snagged to a shoe. Crinkle and drag. White noise,

Black noise. What must be voices bob up, then drop, like metal shavings
In molasses. So much for us. So much for the flags we bored

Into planets dry as chalk, for the tin cans we filled with fire
And rode like cowboys into all we tried to tame. Listen:

The dark we've only ever imagined now audible, thrumming,
Marbled with static like gristly meat. A chorus of engines churns.

Silence taunts: a dare. Everything that disappears
Disappears as if returning somewhere.



This is a place without a terrain a government that always
          changes an unstable language. Even buildings disappear
          from day to day.

[gendered pronoun] wanders in this place
                                                                       [searching
                                                                                                [waiting

the condition of unbearableness is the constant state of mind
            for all occupants

we read all day in the village square during the rule of [name
          of major historical figure] a book that is so subtle

                                                   [its political content goes unnoticed

what is political content?

                                                          [the question or the statement

[gender pronoun] creates

                                        [a reader culture

                                        [generic plural pronoun] prefer both

                                                      II

realism's authenticities are not the question

the question [role of art in the State

we know art is fundamental to the [New State] as is evidenced
         in village scenes, majestic ancient views, masses and
         masses of [generic human figures] marching in columns,
         swords coded as plowshares, image as spectacle

we kn0w [name of city], [adjective], [name of major composer]
to recode [reduce] it: Linz, ambiguous, Wagner

we know [name of major historical figure] calls, authentically,
         for a more total, more radical war than we can even
         dream in the language of the avant-garde

we know a commercial promises to reduce plaque more
         effectively in this same tone

but sometimes we exceed even our own expectations to
          surprise even ourselves

something encloses the impossible in a fable

an unreal world called real because it is so heavily metaphoric

we can't keep our fingers of connection out of it



it is a ride in the country, the car crowded with children
                                                   [each child represents a different
                                                              ethnicity of [name of nation]

it is a moment of standing with light resonating around [major
          historical figure

it is a guiding of the child towards the right path

it is a picnic in a field, the spread is bountiful
[the spread of [name of nation] is represented through the
          arrangement of food on the checkered tablecloth

it is [name of major historical figure]'s Art Collection:
           figure after figure
           each carries spears, lunges, draws the arm back to pull
                   tight the bow

a ruined plaza has a [gendered human form] at its en
        trance

a [generic child] draws a sword under the guidance of
[generic possessive pronoun] [honorific denoting repro-
ductive role]

a [generic human form] raises [generic pronoun] arms and
four horses turn away

another plays a lute

an eagle holds a symbol

fake [name of nation used as an adjective] heads



while the end of lunacy in art was explicit in [name of major
         historical figure]'s rhetoric

while when nation turns to art, art loses its divergence

while the [generic human figures] come back from war, their
         legs in fog

while a [generic human figure] sculpts, small against the
          expanse of marble, giving into the monumental human
          form that symbolizes eugenic possibilities

while another [generic human figure] pedantically draws
          postcards of village centers, operas, mountain vistas

while overwhelmed by an opera [name of major historical 
          figure] plans genocide

                                                    III

we know we respond resistantly as faked children's books of
         realist adventure tales have turned into military instruc-
         tion manuals


or [name of major historical figure] hails a cab, [generic
          possessive human pronoun] hand raised here, beckoning
          as the red flag with [name of fast food chain] waves
          behind [generic human pronoun] and the red star on top  
          of the [name of cultural landmark in major city] twinkles.


many people raise their hands for different purposes all day
         long


we are always waiting for our cab to come



the question here is the same as that of a relationship
where does art define our vocabulary?

the margin declares


[it is impossible to speak about something


it is only possible to speak beside it
                                          









                                          [a film with a voice-over of nonsense

to act in the unsecular forbidden margins [claims a certain
         privilege]



                         [generic human pronoun] cast a colonizing eye


a scripture of space / a place where




a [generic human form] twists in space
                                                               [follow this body]

getting you to recognize yourself in [generic possessive
           pronoun] work



                                                                                    [is kidnapping]

in the space of this question some emigrate or lapse into total
         silence



some co-opt this language and paint a series of meticulous and 
          beautifully colored monumental images of people impris-
          oned and alone at the edge of a tedious despair



some [refigure [refuse] respond] call out for an end



rewritten, the goal of the artist is to prevent reality in a true and
            concrete manner


                                                       IV


[generic human figure] claims I can get more information at
         home than by going to the war scene



what [generic pronoun] sees is [gendered naked bodies] in
          news photos—dead bodies, discarded bodies, junk



i  saw  this written on the bottom



                                                                                 [a way of testimony


the poverty of image among the people of [name of nation]


the continual increase in the amount of image a viewer can
          tolerate

                                                        [who went to [name of nation?


returning again and again to images of torture

covert activities depicted              [blown up

                                                                                   [to show power

                                                              details of photographs
                                                              or Xerox degradations
                                                              of photos on Duraclear
                                                              hang loose are
                                                              vulnerable and
                                                              fragmentary and
                                                              images are seen
                                                              through images and/or
                                                              viewers



[call this]
                the fate of Madame Bovery, the fate of Anna Karenina

A dog with a [generic human face] has slogans coming out 
          of its mouth as angels hold its head back suckle at its
          tits



taped to a [gendered hand, adorned with ring] is a photo-
         graph of [gendered naked torso], gagged



[generic human figure] infects computerized images with
           digitized viruses and then transfers them to canvas with
           a robotic device




                                                   [possible responses to what is seen

in [name of nation] at another time another set of reponses:



a [sexual category withheld] cuts hair and cameras circle
          around and [generic human pronoun] is dragged out of
          the room



another [generic human figure] says passionately we express
          ourselves in a language of regulations. Symbols and
          numbers best convey our ideas



another [generic human figure] makes an enormous painting
           of a massacre victim, mutilated and bloody, and hangs it
           by night on a pedestrian bridge



what a nation gives us is the image in [name of major weekly
          news source] of the [generic human figure] standing
          before the tanks with white flag


[generic pronoun] painted on houses, streets, stones, trees


[generic pronoun] covered [name of island] with strange marks
         in chalk, oil paint, and dye


[generic pronoun] wished to reduce writing to the zero level
         where it is without meaning. When culture invades
         private life on a large scale [generic pronoun] said the
         individual cannot escape being raped


another [generic noun] made a font that was scratched into
         paper by a knife


this font made each letter into a single scratch


[generic pronoun] scratched the other [generic pronoun]'s
         statement on rape into a banner and hung it outside


                                                       [my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                                           protest rape
                                                       [generic pronoun] said
                                                          my zero-level writing
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                       dangerous cultural rape
                                                       [generic pronoun]  said
                                                           my zero-level writing
                                                           my zero-level writing


                                                     V







a voice stutters in the background of our waking mind




[generic possessive pronoun] stutter is our stutter




or it is the way we define our difference?




                                                                                  stutter is nation


beneath an image of human figures the words [you have
          nothing to lose but your chains








                                           at times two voices talk to one another








                                                             [generic human] faces [tired]


we know we are all constructed


when it comes down to it we don't believe it


the social always holds us back


while the ways that we encounter relation are various


we remain


searching [searching


we question, respond



                                                              [deny we [move forward

this is true
a man in an alley grabbed my arm
this is true
someone called me and left the phone dangling at the post office
this is true
a man stalked me

someone tells a story


someone tells a story to another person
another person says I don't believe this
someone tells the story again in an attempt to convince
someone tells


as disbelief is easy
belief is difficult, supported by constraint

but a woman knows a man stalked her
knows this is true

a woman knows her own address
her own body
her lost domain, her desires, her confusions

someone tells a story


there are things people can do to themselves
they are:
leave molotov cocktail on own yard
set fire to own house
leave a glass of urine on own porch
leave envelope of feces outside own door
send a butcher knife to self at work
send letter to health department that self is spreading VD
stab own back


someone tells this story
says this is true
self turns on self
the knife enters at a point that the self could not have reached
         but did
someone tells and then repeats and she stalks herself several
         times to convince
someone tries to enter into the information
to pass words back and forth that have meaning
fails, resorts to this is true


this is true
a woman calls her stalker The Poet

this is true
a woman describes a stalker in terms that describe herself

this is true
a woman stalked herself to kill herself

this is true
a woman is at times a man


when a fish is hooked
other fish don't see the hook

thrashing seems crazy

the hook could be the branding of a woman at a young age
         by a man
or an older male neighbor spending too much time with a
         child
or the boring nature of life

in the story the hook is the artist's rendering of the stalker as
          described by the woman
it is the woman in a man's face

she does not know this man
thrashing seems crazy

later she realizes it is herself
her knife
her hook
her own face she was always drawing male

this is true
as thrashing is not crazy when one is on the hook

“I'm so—”
I start to apologize,
but Albert laughs.
“It's not my birthday,”
he says.
I'm confused.
“It's for you, Bindi.”
“Me?” I say. “It's not
my birthday, either.”
Albert leads me to the chair.
He hands me the present.
I open it.
It's one of those
plastic trophy things.
It says: “World's Best Sister.”
I get all choked up.

“I'm really proud of you,”
says Albert.
“You are?”
“Totally. You came through
a really rough time, Bindi.”
“Not always with flying colors,”
I say.
“True, but you never gave up.”
“I thought I did, sometimes.
And you went to all this trouble?”
Albert shrugs. “It's what brothers do.”

Albert's grandmother pops her head in.
I look up.
Megan and Kyra are in the doorway,
smiling.
Mrs. Poole leads us all
over to the table.
The message on the cake reads:
“Bravo to Our Bindi!”
“Wow!” says Kyra.
Megan turns to Albert.
“Need another sister?”

Fifty-nine days to go.

I can't find my purple beach towel.
I can't even get to my closet
without walking across
a sea of dirty socks.

Mom pokes her head into my doorway,
says:
“Time to clean your room, Sophie.”
And I have to admit
she's right.

And it's not that cleaning my room
is the worst thing to do.
It's just that there are so many other
better things to do,
like—
painting my toenails Strawberry Pink,
eating a huge stack of Uncle Joe's pancakes,
dreaming of riding the Ferris wheel,
thinking up a story to tell
around the campfire
on Scary Story Night,
painting shells,
riding waves . . .
all the fun, wonderful,
sandy, sunny things we do
at Summerhouse Time.

Near the year
1000
we find
Maximos Planudes
nude
writing to a friend
in Asia Minor
asking for parchment
because the right quality
is not for sale
in his own neighborhood,
presumably Constantinople.
 
In the end,
all he receives
are some asses’ skins,
which do not please
him in the least,
and a note:
 
                                                      Dear Max,
 
                                                      No parchment
                                                      till the summer,
                                                      months after the population
                                                      begins to eat meat.
                                                      Low yield
                                                      should come as no surprise,
                                                      our medieval animals
                                                      being much smaller
                                                      than their modern
                                                      counterparts.
 
                                                      Love,
                                                      A. Minor

This is the room.
Where mole guests are welcomed.
At this moment you see the wedding table prepared for the mole guests.
 
Rooms are heated with stoves.
Rooms have been designed according to the patriarchal way of living.
The family has, consists of, father, mather, sons and brides.
There is no sex discrimination within the family.
They artogether, have meal and altogether chat, but when the doors are clased.
 
Mole guests are welcomed in “Selamlik” part.
Femole guests are welcomed in “Harem” part.
On such occasions mole guests are served via the cupboard in the wall
               which turns on its axis.

I want Rattawut Lapcharoensap to write my biography.
I want him to come to my apartment when my boyfriend’s

not home. I want to make him coffee. I know that he
will want to tape record all of our sessions, and

after I die I want these tapes catalogued and archived
in the temperature controlled basement of an ivy league

university library. Additionally, I would like
my biography to have a neon purple dust jacket and

I would like Nancy Milford to grant us permission
to call the book Zelda even though there is already

a book called Zelda because it is about the life of Zelda
Fitzgerald. Maybe because it is just one word and

that word is a name we won’t need permission; I’m
not a lawyer. Also: I would like Martin Scorsese to direct

the movie based on the book based on my real life.
I don’t know if any of you have seen The Departed yet, but

I just saw it last night and my life is almost exactly like that
except instead of Boston I grew up in Chicago, and instead

of going to police academy I toured with Cirque du Soleil.
If Rattawut could just get a hold of a copy of the screenplay

and make Matt Damon a female trapeze artist
who was born to Prussian immigrant parents in 1984,

I’m sure he’d have a good three, four chapters right there, easy.
Have any of you ever tried to think of all the different ways

you could disappoint your parents and then done them?
I chose the calliope over the violin; I ran with gypsies;

I dated a boy three years younger than me just because
he had an apartment and I didn’t want to live

with my parents anymore. I want Rattawut to tell me
he likes my blue sweater. Maybe I’ll sit next to him

while I show him old photographs and wait to see
if he puts his hand on my leg. I don’t know what will happen

to me after I turn 23, but when my biography comes out
I will have to avoid the reviews and the interviews

and any website that gives away the ending.
I will probably have to spend a few weeks in a cabin

in Minnesota. By then, I will have broken up 
with my boyfriend in order to marry Rattawut

beneath a chuppah in the western suburbs of Chicago
because even though I’m not technically Jewish,

my father is, and any tradition is better than none.
When Rattawut gives me my autographed copy,

I’ll stay inside my childhood, making daisy chains,
enrolled in summer programs for the gifted and talented.

I’ll concentrate on the photos of myself holding prize ribbons,
playing leapfrog, dressed up like Elizabeth Cady Stanton.

I won’t read the chapters about my future addiction
to pain medication, my lepidopterophobia,

my failed marriages, my miscarriages, the fire
that will destroy all my manuscripts, my fall

down the stairs. I won’t ever read the last chapter, 
the one that describes in vivid detail the flames

that will erupt from my fatal motorcycle accident
somewhere in the Badlands, how it will take weeks

for them to discover my body. I am only 22 years old. 
I want to fake my death on Facebook. I want a pony.


Mother, I have been devastated all my life. I never said anything. 
That’s why I wear a parachute. Why I tiptoed from my bedroom
to yours, and lay my head on the beige carpet for fear of worse.
Were there sirens? There were. Were there familiar songs? Yes.
I am afraid of the beds I have been in. In the morning there was
the heel of your boot sharper than before. Mother, what do I do
with your mail? Do you want to keep this snake in the basement?
What about the kitten? Do you want all these photographs of other
people’s children? The temperature in the lizard’s cage is dropping.
Let’s be realistic. If I open the windows the birds will come in and
eat out the eyes. Mother, I am bereft. Mother, I wear your necklace
and nothing else. Mother, I never. Nevermind. Let’s be fatalistic.
The neighbors know I’m down here. I can hear them watching.
Mother, after they take your eyes I will sew the lids myself.


   In one corner of the ward
somebody was eating a raw chicken.
The cheerful nurses did not see.
With the tube down my throat
I could not tell them.
Nor did they notice the horror show
on the TV set suspended over my windowless bed.
The screen was dead
but a torn face was clear. 
 
   I did not see my own
in a mirror for weeks.
When it happened,
when I dared to face my face
after the ravaging,
it was not mine
but something whittled, honed down
to a sly resemblance.
It, even the mirror, the pale room,
the oxygen tank
neat and black as a bomb
in its portable crate—
all was hallucination.
 
   But the bloody rooster,
the stray pieces of bodies
slung into dreamless nooks,
the white-haired doll whimpering
on a gift counter—
those were real.
 
   I keep living there.
Foolish. I am home. Half safe.



Today I planted the sand cherry with red leaves— 
and hope that I can go on digging in this yard, 
pruning the grape vine, twisting the silver lace 
on its trellis, the one that bloomed 
just before the frost flowered over all the garden. 
Next spring I will plant more zinnias, marigolds, 
straw flowers, pearly everlasting, and bleeding heart. 
I plant that for you, old love, old friend, 
and lilacs for remembering.   The lily-of-the-valley    
with cream-colored bells, bent over slightly, bowing 
to the inevitable, flowers for a few days, a week. 
Now its broad blade leaves are streaked with brown 
and the stem dried to a pale hair. 
In place of the silent bells, red berries 
like rose hips blaze close to the ground. 
It is important for me to be down on my knees, 
my fingers sifting the black earth, 
making those things grow which will grow. 
Sometimes I save a weed if its leaves 
are spread fern-like, hand-like, 
or if it grows with a certain impertinence. 
I let the goldenrod stay and the wild asters. 
I save the violets in spring.   People who kill violets 
will do anything.


I never had to make one,
no sickening weeks by ocean,
 
no waiting for the aerogrammes
that gradually ceased to come.
 
Spent the babysitting money
on novels, shoes, and movies,
 
yet the neighborhood stayed empty.
It had nothing to do with a journey
 
not undertaken, not with dialect,
nor with a land that waited
 
to be rediscovered, then rejected.
As acid rain collected
 
above the suburban hills, I tried
to imagine being nothing, tried
 
to be able to claim, “I have
no culture,” and be believed.
 
Yet the land occupies the person
even as the semblance of freedom
 
invites a kind of recklessness.
Tradition, unobserved, unasked,
 
hangs on tight; ancestors roam
into reverie, interfering at the most
 
awkward moments, first flirtations,
in doorways and dressing rooms—
 
But of course. Here in America,
no one escapes. In the end, each traveler
 
returns to the town where, everyone
knew, she hadn’t even been born.


It is too much a part of things,
even though the source is not within.
 
In small American cities
with and without universities,
 
it keeps a constant presence
in the Confucian sense,
 
the inner arriving to match
the outer, spirit not separate
 
from matter (the latter illusion
left by the missions
 
the people have made such fine
use of). There are times
 
when you have to pretend
to embrace an idea or befriend
 
your adversaries. If constantly
misinterpreted, use the mystery
 
as currency. You have to start
somewhere. Be wise: depart
 
from where they’ve already put you.
A country itself can’t betray you.

I am not born as yet, 
five minutes before my birth. 
I can still go back 
into my unbirth. 
Now it’s ten minutes before, 
now, it’s one hour before birth. 
I go back, 
I run 
into my minus life. 

I walk through my unbirth as in a tunnel 
with bizarre perspectives. 
Ten years before, 
a hundred and fifty years before, 
I walk, my steps thump, 
a fantastic journey through epochs 
in which there was no me. 

How long is my minus life, 
nonexistence so much resembles immortality. 

Here is Romanticism, where I could have been a spinster, 
Here is the Renaissance, where I would have been 
an ugly and unloved wife of an evil husband, 
The Middle Ages, where I would have carried water in a tavern. 

I walk still further, 
what an echo, 
my steps thump 
through my minus life, 
through the reverse of life. 
I reach Adam and Eve, 
nothing is seen anymore, it’s dark. 
Now my nonexistence dies already 
with the trite death of mathematical fiction. 
As trite as the death of my existence would have been 
had I been really born. 


There are moments 
when I feel more clearly than ever 
that I am in the company 
of my own person. 
This comforts and reassures me, 
this heartens me, 
just as my tridimensional body 
is heartened by my own authentic shadow. 

There are moments 
when I really feel more clearly than ever 
that I am in the company 
of my own person. 

I stop 
at a street corner to turn left 
and I wonder what would happen 
if my own person walked to the right. 

Until now that has not happened 
but it does not settle the question. 

water relives reservoir
boat bottom draft displaced
lineal thought backward body
no one knows the brains I am now
tree an oar origin
joints ruptured soak in deep ink
wallpaper remnant flower float
chandelier brief case hundred words logged
erode  my Arabic
congestion of resin
person forecasts final position
restless sleep
width of back belted
sodium poultice
exhausts courtship agora
drain a home of you 
wind lashes fronds
cellophane where a  mammal  bled
activity not yet diffused
blackened patch of water
weight of oyster 
in gloved hand he shucks
dented pewter
assonance her aspect relocated
wind shatters plexi
phenomena foregone for me
shift at oars
new  muscle grown bone
never held you
case of dried apricot gorge I am summoned capable a day outlast forecast coral reef feeler
paper cover mallet awl downfall fire- box androgyne


one sketch of the stormy petrel
one set of clothes not to be worn during the voyage
one log of the harm that came
you  miss a man so much
music for Haul On the Bowline
slop chest
small stuff
prayer book
Greenlander with a stitch through his nose
coin in his mouth
his custody
broken holy stone at feet sailmaker stitches you inside a sail
last to touch
your craft
slipped starboard
pig on foot does no good
to stay afloat to assure identity
one pot of ink
one paragraph on a miscellaneous custom
quit the American shore quit the  shore of Greenland
miss a man
pot of wood ash
box of blank cards
beef bone sculpture deducted form wages what you bid
seldom mentioned in leisure
his form forecastle slip
cliché poor guy . . .
the oath and the laugh boom
skylark flicks a card in another’s face


I consider the woman’s choice in liberating a red dress with pale-green sandals.
My penury depresses me into a staring contest with a melting ice cube.
A friend excited my husband with an invitation to pilot a boat with powerful thrusters.
My gift of chocolate in pink cellophane failed to make the blonde smile.
Consequently, I remind the party-goers that Trans World Airlines painted a new night with nebulae.

I could be happy in Alphabet City, buildings crumbling around my notepad.
I could be happy sipping iced tea while admiring the seamless face of a pool.
I could be happy gurgling back at an infant dribbling green saliva down his chin.
I could be happy downing Absolut gimlets (ice-cold, no ice) in a neighborhood bar with pool players providing the music, or a hotel whose walls are laminated with mahogany and where tuxedos prevail.
I could be happy with your hand on my waist as you try to identify the scent hollowing my throat.

An entire landscape in Antarctica disappears, evaporates until salt becomes the only debris.
There are keys to everything, even handcuffs.
You could have been happy, too.



HOMONCULUS: n., pl. –li 2. a fully formed, miniature human body believed, according to some medical theories of the 16th and 17th centuries, to be contained in the spermatozoon
                     — The Random House Dictionary of the English Language

The political contributions of whatever he creates are coincidental
and, in any event, irrelevant. The musician may not be relying on
mathematical acoustics in his calculations. He may be performing
for auditoriums; thus, his physical realities change as he travels. Music
seems inevitable. Every question entails some notion of what is being asked.
The motley nature is not alien. Certain sounds guide the vulgar mind
to notions not anticipated by those creating the sounds. A bartender
concocts an Absolut Citroen gimlet, ice-cold but no ice, with one hand;
“with the other hand he gathers up gonorrhea.” Most of what is imparted
is not verbal. Certain philosophers must be translated before their audiences
can respond. The mind is made visible through unconscious functions.

The academic is always searching for the plumber. He is faithful to innocence.
Order is space and space is order. Order is space and space is order.
After being disaffected with Impressionism, Renoir felt he had to learn to draw
and paint all over again. In Germany, an aesthetic movement became political
and was forced to renounce art without realizing a decision had been made.
A philosopher did not realize that the man who expelled poetry from
well-ordered republics used to tremble at the thought of doing so,
thereby creating through that very act a sublime poetry.


I lift my body one leg then another over the cold curve of
the claw-foot tub
Like a walking stick with a colossal cocoon attached
A beast and a mutant   I am this

Hooked on the steam of hot water I
Negotiate stretched skin   a sore spine   the splitting of imminent birth

What do you want

Mammoth   a domemoon stomach
Carved by spidery trails     former settlement

You in there   baby     think you’re ready for this

Sing soprano notes   sing sounds of upness
Says the midwife
She says go ahead   smoke some marijuana   you see she’s our
motherherb   sacred medicine   not for foolery and 
selfishness   never to be used in that other way you know
she works deeply niece   can take care those injuries
bad mister   wrecks   he set     snaring you
this medicine   will   show you    the things killing
all of us

         ----------

This is what’s necessary     I sustain you
You are not ready for me   what is out here
Cruel minds separate small girls from girlhood
Fists pound your brother’s brains through the wall
Yellowdrunk eyes from a failed mind   lick every pair of
Breasts in the room
At home the smoke shop the wake the burial the ceremony the 
Indian-taco stand—

I’m done

         ----------

Just keep sleeping on my mucous pillow
And don’t push on me

O     pouring bowls of light
I see the horrific truths
The most beautiful lie
Will never fool

Never fool
Never fool
The fool

         ----------

What will be the venting of this
Where will we be
How will the vault be lifted

A tinny sound     the drip of persistence
Water into water looking for its level
Always seeking level

No more a drip now a stream continuous motion
Unified atoms 
Pearls cells   threads cries

The house and early night are each black and black

One a lonesome gaping mouth    the other a safe place
To plan
The real fact of spirit leaving body

         ----------

You push to be born fully alive
You press my addiction to the dead world
Birth me out a muse

         ----------

Ancestors glide 
Landing on the levee where the DDT   petroleum  and tobacco
Burned my grandfathers’s flesh    Emiliano    and fueled
My mother’s resistance   Chata

Ancestors scold me     the lanky child running through
Glossy fields
Crabgrass Indian gum plants johnsongrass

Waxy from spraying    the continuous spraying 
O freedom of the green revolution     O  postwar
Stockpiles

O     fucking   inheritance   of the ethnic poor

O    how   we’ve     been    fucked

         ----------

I go through the window opening after opening
Memory buried upon memory      that’s how this appears

Skins    burst   unseam     and inside these is me
A skinny dark girl with a dark brain and a dark mind

Seeking the deja-vu   Zone of Time Flow
Outside of fear

O   no one    can see me    or see what is real
The invasive spray seeping
Follows me and flows in my blood through decades

To my room and the ease of dark and sleep
Dreaming how I’ll wage war on my raiders

O settlers of the empire
O land thieves
O scalpers of my grandfathers
O slave traders of my grandmothers

Books   stand like enemies
Rapists    who’ll conspire to kill me
They wrestle me    I wrestle back   kicking their spines
Splitting their black seeds with my knife    the little
Black letters ejaculate from
Their splintered and crushed chaff

My uterus stops     the surging jolt of you     kicking
You will not miscarry
Not one more
Not ever again

When the end was near
He threatened   hands trembling
There is no end    never    his hands reaching to my face
You can’t leave   taking off his shirt   going for his pants
The trickle of sweat beading off his nose

Moon-orb spray   metallic shimmer     slicklove
Tripping numb night shadows
Crows perched on a streetlight

We’re terrestrial ants living in fragility
On Huhugam sacred ground
Jar of our dead

Like ragged cats my ghosts and I
Gossip in the alley behind a bar
My eyes grasp theirs     a spark     revolution
Feet without tracks on gravel

Our existence erased   far off
From clinking beer bottles and vanity

On the bench outside a bookstore
We get erased    see the news of the street
Resistance getting milled

My favorite ghosts and I bear down harder    birth ourselves

On the bench outside a bookstore
Frigid wind wants to snatch our secrets

Hey nay ya na ya na ya na
I thank you thank you for your presence
My ghosts   I thank you for your presence
Hey nay ya na   ya na   ya na  ya na
This dilemma  oh ancestors
O! ancestors !!!!   I thank you  thank you  thank you
Hey nay ya na ya na ya na ya na

I’m still the Lipan Jumano land-grant mongrel
Nobody sees   nobody recognizes   an invisibility
Scudding through all the checkpoints
Border towns  train tracks  pesticide flybys   welfare lines

Wings shifting shape
Scorpion’s venom injects me for the night

Green light spasms in the click click delete cut past
fucking do something  do something different

An orgasm of light at the slippery edge
One good time to die
And live spreading like osmosis

Tripping grandmother rabbit on the moon
Always with that sorrowful look on her face
Make the medicine
Be artistic
Do what is necessary


“If it comes to that,” he said, “there’ll be no
preventing it.”
He uttered it as I listened. Had I got it right,
hearing him?
“If it comes to that,” is what he said, and, 
as if talking
to himself, went on about how there’d be no
preventing it.
He came to that conclusion, saying it in a 
slow way of
coming to that, whatever that was it might
come to before
not being prevented—and as if such a thing
were for him
the unthinkable, and would prevail, if it 
came to that.
 
And while listening more closely now to
what he said, 
I realized if no one paid him heed, it would
be as if he
hadn’t said it—if it came to that—and would
then not be
prevented from falling to forces known to 
care little for
what he said, even if they heard it, their
being wily
and forceful enough to make sure it would 
come to that.

spilling water from my back,
you call and i come.
that exhausted walk to reach you
breathless and no i didn’t run
to see you, i’ve been smoking
too much, same thing.
 
another awkward hug in the car
as my face smashes your cheek
that i can feel it leaving now
is the saddest, a beautiful eruption
you could have picked it off the tree
and chowed
 
but you weren’t hungry.
feeling it dying away all day
much worse than the straining
against the leash, another gorgeous
thing that should not have happened,
gone again.


In the green rags of the Bible I tore up
The straight silk of childhood on my head 
                                     I left the house, I fled
My mother’s brow where I had no ambition 
                                   But to stroke the writing 
                                                             I raked in.

She who dressed in wintersilk my head
That month when there is baize on the high wall 
Where the dew cloud presses its lustration,
And the thrush is but a brooch of rain
As the world flies softly in the wool of heaven.

             I was a guest at my own youth; under 
The lamp tossed by a moth for thirteen winters 
                             Sentenced to cabbage and kisses
By She who crammed an Earth against my feet and 
                             Pulled over me the bright rain
                                                        Storm of fleece.

Not for me – citizenship of the backdoor
Where even the poor wear wings; while on Sunday 
Gamy ventilations raise their dilettante
In the bonnet of the satin-green dung fly,
And fungus sweats a livery of epaulettes.

                            I was a hunter whose animal
Is that dark hour when the hemisphere moves
                              In deep blue blaze of dews
And you, brunette of the birdmusic tree,
                                 Stagger in spat diamonds
                                                           Drunkenly. 

Like some Saint whose only blasphemy is a 
Magnificent juice vein that plucks his groin
With April’s coarse magicianship as green
As the jade squirt of fruit, I was the child whose breast 
Rocks to a muscle savage as Africa.

             Thundercloud, your wool was rough with mud 
As the coat of a wild beast on which flowers grow,
                                          Your brogue of grunts so low 
                       They left soil in the mouth. After you, I 
                                Walked as through a Djinn’s brain
                                                                   Gleaming lane.

I was incriminated by your hammer
In my chest. And forfeit to the crepe hoods
Of my mother’s eyes; the iron door of her oven 
And her church. Skies, cut to blind, had but laid on 
Her priest’s mouth the green scabs of winter.

                           But I had the marvellous infection! 
                              Leaning upon my fairy and my dog 
                                                            In the ultramarine
        Latitudes of dew shook like a tear that’s carried 
                          Through darkness on the knuckles of 
                                                              A woman’s glove. 

I saw each winter where my hen-thrush
Left her fork in famine’s white banqueting cloth; 
Could I not read as well the tradesman’s hand
With its magenta creases – whose soul turns blandly 
On a sirloin mattress to smile at the next meal?

O She who would paper her lamp with my wings! 
That hour when all the Earth is drinking the
                               Blue drop of thunder; and in 
Dark debris as of a magician’s room, my beast 
                                                A scented breathing 
                                                               To the East.

I swear that I would not go back
To pole the glass fishpools where the rough breath lies 
That built the Earth – there, under the heavy trees 
With their bark that’s full of grocer’s spice, 

Not for an hour – although my heart
Moves, thirstily, to drink the thought – would I 
Go back to run my boat
On the brown rain that made it slippery, 

I would not for a youth
Return to ignorance, and be the wildfowl
Thrown about by the dark water seasons
With an ink-storm of dark moods against my soul, 

And no firm ground inside my breast,
Only the breath of God that stirs
Scent-kitchens of refreshing trees,
And the shabby green cartilage of play upon my knees. 

With no hard earth inside my breast
To hold a Universe made out of breath,
Slippery as fish with their wet mortar made of mirrors 
I laid a grip of glass upon my youth. 

And not for the waterpools would I go back
To a Universe unreal as breath – although I use
The great muscle of my heart
To thirst like a drunkard for the scent-storm of the trees.


I am four in this photograph, standing   
on a wide strip of Mississippi beach,   
my hands on the flowered hips 

of a bright bikini. My toes dig in,   
curl around wet sand. The sun cuts   
the rippling Gulf in flashes with each   

tidal rush. Minnows dart at my feet 
glinting like switchblades. I am alone 
except for my grandmother, other side   

of the camera, telling me how to pose.   
It is 1970, two years after they opened   
the rest of this beach to us,   

forty years since the photograph   
where she stood on a narrow plot   
of sand marked colored, smiling, 

her hands on the flowered hips   
of a cotton meal-sack dress.


Here, she said, put this on your head.
She handed me a hat.
You ’bout as white as your dad,
and you gone stay like that.

Aunt Sugar rolled her nylons down
around each bony ankle,
and I rolled down my white knee socks
letting my thin legs dangle,

circling them just above water
and silver backs of minnows
flitting here then there between
the sun spots and the shadows.

This is how you hold the pole
to cast the line out straight.
Now put that worm on your hook,
throw it out and wait.

She sat spitting tobacco juice
into a coffee cup.
Hunkered down when she felt the bite,
jerked the pole straight up

reeling and tugging hard at the fish
that wriggled and tried to fight back.
A flounder, she said, and you can tell
’cause one of its sides is black.

The other side is white, she said.
It landed with a thump.
I stood there watching that fish flip-flop,
switch sides with every jump.


So by sixteen we move in packs 
learn to strut and slide 
in deliberate lowdown rhythm 
talk in a syn/co/pa/ted beat 
because we want so bad 
to be cool, never to be mistaken 
for white, even when we leave 
these rowdier L.A. streets— 
remember how we paint our eyes 
like gangsters 
flash our legs in nylons 
sassy black high heels 
or two inch zippered boots 
stack them by the door at night 
next to Daddy’s muddy gardening shoes.


can go to Bible study every Sunday
and swear she’s still not convinced,
but she likes to be around people who are.
We have the same conversation
every few years—I’ll ask her if she stops
to admire the perfect leaves
of the Japanese maple
she waters in her backyard,
or tell her how I can gaze for hours
at a desert sky and know this
as divine. Nature, she says, 
doesn’t hold her interest. Not nearly
as much as the greens, pinks, and grays 
of a Diebenkorn abstract, or the antique
Tiffany lamp she finds in San Francisco.
She spends hours with her vegetables,
tasting the tomatoes she’s picked that morning
or checking to see which radishes are big enough to pull.
Lately everything she touches bears fruit,
from new-green string beans to winning
golf strokes, glamorous hats she designs and sews,
soaring stocks with their multiplying shares.
These are the things she can count in her hands,
the tangibles to feed and pass on to daughters
and grandchildren who can’t keep up with all
the risky numbers she depends on, the blood-sugar counts
and daily insulin injections, the monthly tests
of precancerous cells in her liver and lungs.
She’s a mathematical wonder with so many calculations
kept alive in her head, adding and subtracting
when everyone else is asleep.

What we will remember—we tried to take the dog, 
packed around him, making a cozy spot 
at the back of the Subaru, blocking out the sun, 
resisting the obvious—
he was too old, he would not make it. 
And when he died in Minnesota, 
we smelled and smelled his paws, 
arthritic and untouchable these last many years, 
took those marvelous paws up into our faces. 
They smelled of dark clay
and sweet flower bloom decay.


Spooky summer on the horizon I’m gazing at 
from my window into the streets 
That’s where it’s going to be where everyone is 
walking around, looking around out in the open 
suspecting each other’s heart to open fire 
all over the streets 
                              like streets you read about every day 
who are the network we travel through on the way to the center 
which is energy filling life 
and bursting with joy all over the screen 
                                                             I can’t sit still any longer! 

I want to go where I’m not feeling so bad 
Get off this little island before the bridges break 
(my heart is a sore thing too) 
No I want to sit in the middle watching movies 
then go to bed in my head 
Someone is banging on it with a heavy stick like the enemy 
who is he going to be turns into a face you can’t recognize 
then vanishes behind a window behind a gun 
Like the lonely hero stalking the main street 
cries out Where are you? I just want to know 
all the angles of death possible under the American sky! 

I can hardly see for all the buildings polluting the sky 
until it changes into a barrage of bottles 
then clears up for a second while you breathe 
and you realize you’e still as alive as ever and want to be 
but would like to be somewhere else perhaps Africa 
Start all over again as the race gets darker and darker 
and the world goes on the way I always thought it would 
For the winner is someone we recognize out of our collective past 
which is turning over again in the grave 

                                    It is so important when one dies you replace her 
                                    and never waste a minute


I sit in my own shadow, she says, the way my mother gave birth to it. In artificial light, blinds drawn against the darkness of power.  I think of you as if you were that shadow, a natural enclosure, a world, not a slight, so I can wander through your darkness. Has our contract inverted time, made our universe contract, a cramped bed for two? And when I say your name, do I draw water, a portrait, curtain, bridge, or conclusion?



Place there is none, he quotes. Not even to hang up our archetypes. Let alone Star-Spangled Banners. We go forward and backward, and there is no place. Therefore it is a name for God. My eye, steadfast on traffic lights, abolishes the larger part of the round world. I should look at my feet. Space sweeps through us, a hell of distances bathed in the feeble glow of emptiness. Outward mobility, unimpeded. Suddenly we’re nobody home, without any need of inattention, imposture, or talent for deceit.



The wind whips my skin as if it were water, she says. My skin is water. For wind read wind, news, sky falling. Is it a mental disturbance or the higher math of love if I hear you talking under my breath and from the torn fragments assume the sun is far away and small, and a look can cause a burn? Superstition, too, is a kind of understanding, and to forgo it may have consequences.



Clusters of possibilities whiz through our head, he says. Electric charges, clogged highway, screeching brakes, a house too full of guests. With grounds for disagreement and miscarriage. The light rushes in dry, screaming. But the opaque parts of the nerve oppose the noise and void the options. Then the project must be prolonged in terms of lack.


After bitter resistance the river unravels into the night, he says. Washes our daily fare of war out into a dark so deaf, so almost without dimension there is no word to dive from. Body weight displaced by dreams whose own lack promises lucidity so powerful it could shoot a long take to mindlessness. Fish smell travels the regions of sleep, westward like young men and the dawn. Then I return, too early to bring anything back, unsure of what I want, terrified I’ll fail, by a hair, to seize it. 



We talk because we can forget, she says. Our bodies open to the dark, and sand runs out. Oblivion takes it all with equal tenderness. As the sea does. As the past. Already it suffuses the present with more inclusive tonalities. Not orchestrating a melodic sequence, but rounding the memory of a rooster on top a hanging silence. Or injured flesh. Impersonal. Only an animal could be so. 

 

An avatar of the holy ghost, he chuckles. Or the angel of the annunciation beating his wings against a door slammed shut. Behind it, love already plays the organ. Without the angel. He is invisible because we have rejected his message.



On the old photos, she says, I see a stranger staking out my skin. As if an apple could fall too far from the tree. Yet I call her “me,” “my” years of furtively expanding flesh, with almost-certainty. It’s a belief that seems exempt from doubt, as if it were the hinge on which my doubts and questions turn. Still, I may seem the same “I” to you while I’ve already rolled it through the next door. From left to right.


we all went to town one day 
went to a store 
bought you new shoes 
red   high heels 
    
aint seen you since

It was a way of punishing the house, setting it ablaze 
in ruddy, golden flames; smoke 
in billows up the front stairs; walls 
cringing like leaves.   
I say, I am afraid 
in my own house. Do not believe 
I started this, it was 
that man, who was to portray the park alone, mind you, 
but then became 
enamored of the music room. 
And now what have we: floods 
of fire rolling from room to room, furniture wrecked 
in seethe, my wife   
Lady Amelia turned 
wraith, God knows what fish 
and drowning slaves cast up in the tide 
along with pocket Bibles, snuffboxes, antimacassars, the   
familiar bric-a-brac of the well-kept house. 
Where are Edward, Lavinia, Jane? Why 
is no one crying, “Fire! Fire!”? Am I 
alone? 
         The man has no sense of proportion. 
He had himself lashed to the mast, once, it is said, 
on a steamboat off the harbor mouth 
in full blizzard: sailors blinded by snow, the boat 
crippled, led by the lead, they damn near died to a man, and he— 
he was observing “the light at sea,” he said. 
The painting? “Soapsuds and whitewash,”   
the critics described it so. 

But here, in our house, it is catastrophe   
of flame, not weather, he loosed. 
He is a man 
in love with last things, clearly, 
the last things, but 
never understood the first, it seems to me,   
and certainly not the genial medias res
of decorous, daily life. 
What tea-times we’ve known in these chambers, what sonatinas, 
lieder of an evening, whist, 
Emmeline embroidering, the hounds calm at the hearth, now all 
dissolved. 
               Perhaps there are no flames.   
A bloody haze arises, it could be 
my own eyes that fail. 
I hear nothing, but fear 
the upstairs rooms, cramped rooms 
I have not entered in ages, only remember 
the draughts, creakings, grime in closet corners,   
windows too tight to lean from, the smell   
of antique damp. And now, who knows   
what acts unroll 
on narrow beds, on floorboards warped askew? 
As steam is rising, rising? As heat 
buoys the house up into an atmosphere   
all of its own creation? 
Who are 
the participants? Where has Amelia gone?   
Why, in this furnace, can I hear no sound,   
or feel my own skin begin to peel?


The scruffy house cat
aches to fly—
she dreams all day of
wings and sky!

So tonight
she climbs the ladder,
mounts a platform,
nothing matters

except to catch
a thin trapeze
then hold on tight
with grace and ease.

She swings herself
by both front paws
then somesaults
to wild applause

of kitchen mice,
who, though dizzy,
encourage Cat,
to keep her busy.

Welcome, Flowers.
Write your name on a name tag.
Find a seat.

Rasie your leaf if you've taken a class here before.
Let's go around the room.
Call out your colors.

I see someone's petal has fallen—
please pick it up and put it in your desk
where it belongs.

Sprinklers at recess,
fertilizer for lunch, 
and you may snack on the sun throughout the day.

Excuse me . . .
what's that in your mouth?
A bee?

Did you 
bring enough
for everyone?

Tsung Ping (375—443): "Now I am old and infirm. I fear I shall no more be able to roam among the beautiful mountains. Clarifying my mind, I meditate on the mountain trails and wander about only in dreams." 
-in The Spirit of the Brush, tr. by Shio Sakanishi, p. 34

for Kenneth Rexroth
I always say I won't go back to the mountains 
I am too old and fat there are bugs mean mules 
And pancakes every morning of the world 

Mr. Edward Wyman (63) 
Steams along the trail ahead of us all 
Moaning, "My poor feet ache, my back 
Is tired and I've got a stiff prick" 
Uprooting alder shoots in the rain 

Then I'm alone in a glass house on a ridge 
Encircled by chiming mountains 
With one sun roaring through the house all day 
& the others crashing through the glass all night 
Conscious even while sleeping 

    Morning fog in the southern gorge 
    Gleaming foam restoring the old sea-level 
    The lakes in two lights green soap and indigo 
    The high cirque-lake black half-open eye 

Ptarmigan hunt for bugs in the snow 
Bear peers through the wall at noon 
Deer crowd up to see the lamp 
A mouse nearly drowns in the honey 
I see my bootprints mingle with deer-foot 
Bear-paw mule-shoe in the dusty path to the privy 

Much later I write down: 
    "raging. Viking sunrise 
    The gorgeous death of summer in the east!" 
(Influence of a Byronic landscape— 
Bent pages exhibiting depravity of style.) 

Outside the lookout I lay nude on the granite 
Mountain hot September sun but inside my head 
Calm dark night with all the other stars 

HERACLITUS: "The waking have one common world 
But the sleeping turn aside 
Each into a world of his own." 

I keep telling myself what I really like 
Are music, books, certain land and sea-scapes 
The way light falls across them, diffusion of 
Light through agate, light itself . . . I suppose 
I'm still afraid of the dark 

    "Remember smart-guy there's something 
    Bigger something smarter than you." 
    Ireland's fear of unknown holies drives 
    My father's voice (a country neither he 
    Nor his great-grandfather ever saw) 

    A sparkly tomb a plated grave 
    A holy thumb beneath a wave 

Everything else they hauled across Atlantic 
Scattered and lost in the buffalo plains 
Among these trees and mountains 

From Duns Scotus to this page 
A thousand years 

    (". . . a dog walking on this hind legs— 
    not that he does it well but that he   
    does it at all.") 

Virtually a blank except for the hypothesis 
That there is more to a man 
Than the contents of his jock-strap 

EMPEDOCLES: "At one time all the limbs 
Which are the body's portion are brought together 
By Love in blooming life's high season; at another 
Severed by cruel Strife, they wander each alone 
By the breakers of life's sea." 

Fire and pressure from the sun bear down 
Bear down centipede shadow of palm-frond 
A limestone lithograph—oysters and clams of stone 
Half a black rock bomb displaying brilliant crystals 
Fire and pressure Love and Strife bear down 
Brontosaurus, look away 

My sweat runs down the rock 

HERACLITUS: "The transformations of fire 
are, first of all, sea; and half of the sea 
is earth, half whirlwind. . . . 
It scatters and it gathers; it advances 
and retires." 

I move out of a sweaty pool 
       (The sea!) 
And sit up higher on the rock 

Is anything burning? 

The sun itself! Dying 
Pooping out, exhausted 
Having produced brontosaurus, Heraclitus 
This rock, me, 
To no purpose 
I tell you anyway (as a kind of loving) . . . 
Flies & other insects come from miles around 
To listen 
I also address the rock, the heather, 
The alpine fir 

BUDDHA: "All the constituents of being are 
Transitory: Work out your salvation with diligence." 

(And everything, as one eminent disciple of that master 
Pointed out, had been tediously complex ever since.) 

There was a bird 
Lived in an egg 
And by ingenious chemistry 
Wrought molecules of albumen 
To beak and eye 
Gizzard and craw 
Feather and claw 

My grandmother said: 
"Look at them poor bed- 
raggled pigeons!" 

And the sign in McAlister Street: 

            "IF YOU CAN'T COME IN 
            SMILE AS YOU GO BY 
                   LOVE 
               THE BUTCHER 

I destroy myself, the universe (an egg) 
And time—to get an answer: 
There are a smiler, a sleeper and a dancer 

We repeat the conversation in the glittering dark 
Floating beside the sleeper. 
The child remarks, "You knew it all the time." 
I: "I keep forgetting that the smiler is 
Sleeping; the sleeper, dancing." 

From Sauk Lookout two years before 
Some of the view was down the Skagit 
To Puget Sound: From above the lower ranges, 
Deep in the forest—lighthouses on clear nights. 

This year's rock is a spur from the main range 
Cuts the valley in two and is broken 
By the river; Ross Dam repairs the break, 
Makes trolley buses run 
Through the streets of dim Seattle far away. 

I'm surrounded by mountains here 
A circle of 108 beads, originally seeds 
    of ficus religiosa
          Bo-Tree 
A circle, continuous, one odd bead 
Larger than the rest and bearing 
A tassel (hair-tuft) (the man who sat 
             under the tree) 
In the center of the circle, 
a void, an empty figure containing 
All that's multiplied; 
Each bead a repetition, a world 
Of ignorance and sleep. 

Today is the day the goose gets cooked 
Day of liberation for the crumbling flower 
Knobcone pinecone in the flames 
Brandy in the sun 

Which, as I said, will disappear 
Anyway it'll be invisible soon 
Exchanging places with stars now in my head 
To be growing rice in China through the night. 
Magnetic storms across the solar plains 
Make Aurora Borealis shimmy bright 
Beyond the mountains to the north. 

Closing the lookout in the morning 
Thick ice on the shutters 
Coyote almost whistling on a nearby ridge 
The mountain is THERE (between two lakes) 
I brought back a piece of its rock 
Heavy dark-honey color 
With a seam of crystal, some of the quartz 
Stained by its matrix 
Practically indestructible 
A shift from opacity to brilliance 
(The Zenbos say, "Lightening-flash & flint-spark") 
Like the mountains where it was made 

What we see of the world is the mind's 
Invention and the mind 
Though stained by it, becoming 
Rivers, sun, mule-dung, flies— 
Can shift instantly 
A dirty bird in a square time 

Gone 
Gone 
REALLY gone 
Into the cool 
O MAMA! 

Like they say, "Four times up, 
Three times down." I'm still on the mountain.



     Thanks, Ray, this is just what the doctor ordered.
 
     No, you never see me have one with olives—your father likes
olives but I can’t stand them.
 
     No, cocktail onions are just picked small. Turn that down, Dan.
 
            Avocados, toothpicks. Coleus, root sprawl.
            The diffident glints of a late-day sun, rays
            splintered by leaves: they shake and, in their
            shaking, streak the light. Transparent murk
            of glasses at the glass.
 
     Would you move just one inch over? There. The light was in my eye.

  Oh, dangling long sleeves in the Mercurochrome.
            Parking her punch on her knees.
 
     I’m not a joiner.
 
            In the night, a visitation, small as a thumb,
            enters the sealed house and ascends.
 
     Mother wouldn’t have stood for that long. Drippy-drooping around
on heels. Leaving the blue cheese out.

Down at the end of Baxter Street, where Five Points   
slum used to be, just north of Tombs, is a pocket park.   
On these summer days the green plane trees’ leaves   
linger heavy as a noon mist above   
the men playing mah jongg—more Chinese   
in the air than English.  The city’s composed    
of village greens; we rely on the Thai   
place on the corner: Tom Kha for a cold,   
jasmine tea for fever, squid for love, Duck Yum   
for loneliness.  Outside, the grove of heat,   
narrow streets where people wrestle rash and unseen   
angels; inside, the coolness of a glen and the wait staff   
in their pale blue collars offering ice water.   
Whatever you’ve done or undone, there’s a dish for you   
to take out or eat in: spice for courage, sweet for chagrin.   



The twist of the stream was inscrutable. 
It was a seemingly run-of-the-mill 
stream that flowed for several miles by the side 
of Route 302 in northern Vermont— 
and presumably does still—but I’ve not 
been back there for what seems like a long time. 

I have it in my mind’s eye, the way 
one crested a rise and rounded a corner 
on the narrow blacktop, going west, and saw 
off to the left in the flat green meadow 
the stream turning briefly back on itself 
to form a perfect loop—a useless light-filled 
water noose or fragment of moon’s cursive, 
a sign or message of some kind—but left behind.


The dragonfly at rest on the doorbell— 
too weak to ring and glad of it, 
but well mannered and cautious, 
thinking it best to observe us quietly 
before flying in, and who knows if he will find 
the way out? Cautious of traps, this one.
A winged cross, plain, the body straight 
as a thermometer, the old glass kind 
that could kill us with mercury if our teeth 
did not respect its brittle body. Slim as an eel 
but a solitary glider, a pilot without bombs 
or weapons, and wings clear and small as a wish
to see over our heads, to see the whole picture. 
And when our gaze grazes over it and moves on, 
the dragonfly changes its clothes,
sheds its old skin, shriveled like laundry, 
and steps forth, polished black, with two 
circles buttoned like epaulettes taking the last space 
at the edge of its eyes.



I try tearing paper into tiny, perfect squares— 
they cut my fingers.  Warm milk, perhaps, 
stirred counter-clockwise in a cast iron pan— 
but even then there’s burning at the edges, 
angry foam-hiss.  I’ve been told 
to put trumpet flowers under my pillow, 
I do: stamen up, the old crone said. 
But the pollen stains, and there are bees, 
I swear, in those long yellow chambers, echoing, 
the way the house does, mocking, with its longevity— 
each rib creaking and bending where I’m likely to break— 

I try floating out along the long O of lone, 
to where it flattens to loss, and just stay there 
disconnecting the dots of my night sky 
as one would take apart a house made of sticks, 
carefully, last addition to first, 
like sheep leaping backward into their pens.


Of course we knew the “incidents,” the aura
of Divinity, duck-and-cover in the parking garage,
Gloria Swanson chinchilla redux, yes,
he’d been a bombshell—the eyes still sang
with the merriment of a punchbowl, fine wrists,
that dahlia neck, skin bleached with peroxide,
of course he swam in the nude, stashed gin
in the toilet tank, stored stockings in the freezer
so they wouldn’t run, had a thing for Adenauer,
played roulette with the .45 won in a Cuban dancehall,
raging along hallways, fathering four children,
feeling the eyes of the back stairs, beck of the undercurrent,
his own hand in his lap like an orphan,
of course he gardened in Dior, of course he was flagrant,

but what escaped us was the way he peeked
into the neighbor’s kitchen drawers for something
he swore they’d stolen, beyond the foreground obligation,
aspiration insistent as a stuck car horn in the slow
blue hours of morning, discarded affection,
what escaped us was the dampness at the collarbone,
the delicacy of the pose (cigarette and upturned cheek),
the lingering by the kitchen knives, the bias cut
off the dressing gown, break and fall, tumbrel of illusion—

and what we wanted to escape: that he was ruthless, beyond hope.

The shelter of it carved, caved 
Across the river, the park and the little Ferris wheel 
       closed down 
The great oaks emptying, russet, gusseted 
the hovering slant light leaking from the outer edge 
       of cloud bed 
leads and shawls pulled forth 
Thy synchrony of the lost elements recovered 
the shivering water surfaces, planar unmeldings, remeldings, 
       riverine alchemies, unlocketed selves 
now the reemergence, the sun pouring global gold 
       uptilted, gobleted, incanted 
Am I not as God made me but stranger? 
Made stranger still by what I have seen 
at this hour of earth untended, unministered— 
light caught up in the river’s grooved tread 
That sun more like a mass grope out of emptiness 
       and the black river weeds before it, torn and trained, 
       rocketed and stark and stuck-to 
The tall shadow of the willow grows forth 
And the spare stems of the grasses and the rods of the mullein 
And these are the stations of this river 
The houses and the boats and the parked cars 
The growing wedge the ducks make moving forward, the shape 
       of the element there among the weeds that jut forward, 
the mass of the willows growing deeper in green and sundering 
The backfall of sun going downward 
The surface of the river coming clear of its own admixture 
The ducks moving over like slow planes in formation, 
       barely seen needles hauling white threads, 
       secretly heeding 
The fish in my skin relinquishes 
Will I know then what I have become? 
The river darkens from its end of trees closing in 
There is the sun and this deep depression 
Exiting as viewed in this river


Barely discerned clouds 
Hard, hard to get here 
what worth, what worth 
River of steel. 
River of no one becoming you. 
Trees that are emptier today, more forced in their forms 
To focus on them is to be made glad of them in their 
       strangeness 
The earth extrudes through them toward emptiness 
The few elms dismembering 
The willow’s bloom above shore like a curtaining 
To focus on it is to be mostly taken into its tapes 
       and its filters 
It is lost to the surface of this river 
The dull, impenetrable, intractable surface 
resisting, unetchable 
Now the faint rain. 
I don’t know what to do with all this waiting 
things getting themselves readied toward emptiness 
The scratchy, shattering elm, its crimped skin, its 
       exfoliating, its rivening 
       its being disfigured by fortune 
       and by wind 
A crone with old frills at her hair 
The grasp of her toward me

Didn’t I stand there once, 
white-knuckled, gripping the just-lit taper, 
swearing I’d never go back? 
And hadn’t you kissed the rain from my mouth? 
And weren’t we gentle and awed and afraid, 
knowing we’d stepped from the room of desire 
into the further room of love? 
And wasn’t it sacred, the sweetness 
we licked from each other’s hands? 
And were we not lovely, then, were we not 
as lovely as thunder, and damp grass, and flame?

My mother sleeps with the Bible open on her pillow; 
she reads herself to sleep and wakens startled. 
She listens for her heart: each breath is shallow. 
 
For years her hands were quick with thread and needle. 
She used to sew all night when we were little; 
now she sleeps with the Bible on her pillow 
 
and believes that Jesus understands her sorrow: 
her children grown, their father frail and brittle; 
she stitches in her heart, her breathing shallow. 
 
Once she even slept fast, rushed tomorrow, 
mornings full of sunlight, sons and daughters. 
Now she sleeps alone with the Bible on her pillow 
 
and wakes alone and feels the house is hollow, 
though my father in his blue room stirs and mutters; 
she listens to him breathe: each breath is shallow. 
 
I flutter down the darkened hallway, shadow 
between their dreams, my mother and my father, 
asleep in rooms I pass, my breathing shallow. 
I leave the Bible open on her pillow.


I could have anything I wanted
from the maws of the vending machines
that stood watch over the waiting
room of my stepfather’s Shell station.
Larry or Chubbs would fish out keys
with grimy fingers, swing open
the face of the machine, reveal its innards
stacked columns of soda or candy bars.

Outside the constant ding of the bell
as cars pulled in for gas, directions,
air in the tires, a clean windshield,
drivers impatient for destination,
and Chubbs or Larry would dash, leave
me to choose: Planter’s Peanut
Bar or Nestle’s Crunch, Coke
or orange or chocolate pop. Grit

covered that tiny room, layered
on maps in their laddered racks, dusting
the globe of the gumball machine,
sifted over neat rows of motor oil
in silver cans, smudging the white
pages of homework I filled with
painstaking script. I breathed
the stink of petroleum, kicked

at the legs of a yellow plastic
chair with my black and white
school oxfords, waiting for my stepfather
who was supposed to watch me till
my mother got off work. Nine was too
young, she thought, to stay at home alone.
But every day he’d disappear, banged-up
Chevy gone from the lot, the men

in oil-streaked uniforms shrugging excuses.
“Anything she wants,” he’d instructed them,
and I watched the clock as the sky
darkened and the bright shell glowed
against night. My new bra was too tight;
I hugged my three-ring binder to hide my roll
of belly from Larry, from Chubbs, and sucked
the dregs of chocolate pop or lemon-lime.



We fought in Salem,
as she nosed the rented car
through streets that
stubbornly refused to match
the squiggled lines
accordioning from my lap.
She pressed me for direction
as I spun the folding paper
like a compass point,
urged me for instruction
as I traced the lines like Braille,
my fingers blinded,
tapping out the spell of history;
I could not navigate this town.

How could I explain
the pall of Salem?
There’s not an inch on Earth
that isn't steeped in blood—
corpses pushing up the cobblestones
in every town,
and the buildings that blunt the sky
are girdered in bone.
One could travel anywhere
and feel that chill,
the hovering of ghosts
above the landscape,
the past’s damp breath
against the ear.

This town, though,
descended like a shroud
upon my holiday;
Salem,
its rectilinearity
compressed the ribbon of my spine
and sealed my thighs
like doorways to a crypt;
Salem,
its somber abnegation,
grimmest reprobation
sought to suck me to a hollow shell
through which the vengeful cries of God
then could be heard. 

My lover, steering wheel in hand,
stared into narrow streets
with the eyes of a dark bird.
“Which way,” she cawed, “which way?”
But mine glowed with the blankness
of a woman swaying from a noose,
clothing asunder,
curses drowning in an airless throat,
spirit driven from its home;
it circled now above our heads.
The useless atlas crumpled at my feet,
it could not lead me to a place
where threat did not bear down like heavy stones;
we fought in Salem.



The irresistible and benevolent light
brushes through the angel-wing begonias,
the clippings of ruddy ears for the living room.
Intimate motes, debris of grounded, forlorn walks,
speckle through the vitreous quality of blush.
As fluid lulls turn like trout backs, azure-tipped fins
oscillate in the shallows, the clear floating
is dizziness.

Tender events are meeting halves and wholes of affinity,
the recurrence of whimsy and parallel streams
flush away the blockage of malaise.
Incessant gratitude, pliable kindness smolders
in the husk of these sweet accumulations:
abalone shells, the thoughtful carvings from friends,
the stone of another’s pocket, the photo of mystified 
moon over water, the smiles of worn chairs.

Austere hopes find pleasure in lately cherished flowers.
The blooms are articulate deluge, hues of delicacy.
Petals parted dim renderings, the viable imprint
of the blood-hot beam of light with reformed courage.
Beveling the finish to suppression, the blade of choice 
brings the flourish of dividing while adequately doubling
worth by two. Multiplying. The luminescent burning of space.
The heat is a domicile as abandoned as red roses budding
their ascension from stem.

The sun has its own drum contenting itself with the rose
heart it takes into continual rumbling. The connection
of surface and hand. The great head of dark clouds finds 
its own place of unraveled repercussions and disruption,
elsewhere, over the tall, staunch mountains of indemnity.

The buildings are worn.
The trees are strong and ancient.
They bend against the grid of electric lines.
The windows are broken
by the homeless and the cold past.
I am home on the yard
that spreads mint, pales the Victorian roses,
takes into it the ravaged lilac tree.
The black bulk of plastic lies about
stopping unwanted weeds for the Landlord.
Tattered, the cedar tree is chipped to dry heaps of recklessness.
The unwanted spreads by the power of neglect.
The wear of traffic says that we are out of time,
must hurry.

Age, the creak in the handmade screen door fades behind itself.



Three people drinking out of the bottle 
in the living room. 
A cold rain. Quiet as a mirror. 

One of the men 
stuffs his handkerchief in his coat, 
climbs the stairs with the girl. 
The other man is left sitting 

at the desk with the wine and the headache, 
turning an old Ellington side 
over in his mind. And over. 

He held her like a saxophone 
when she was his girl. 
Her tongue trembling at the reed. 

The man lying next to her now 
thinks of another woman. 
Her white breath idling 

before he drove off. 
He said something about a spell, 
watching the snow fall on her shoulders. 

The musician 
crawls back into his horn, 
ancient terrapin 
at the approach of the wheel.


Where the old trees reign with their forward dark   
light stares through a hole in the body’s long   
house. The bed rolls away from the body, 
and the body is forced to find a chair. At some hour   
the body sequesters itself in a shuttered room 
with no clock. When a clean sheet of paper floats by,   
the head inclines on its axis. It is one of those 
common bodies that felt it could not exist without loving,   
but has in fact gone on and on without love. 
Like a cave that has stopped growing, we don’t call it dead,   
but dormant. Now the body is on all fours, one arm   
engaged in pulling hair from a trap, an activity   
the body loathes. When the time comes, the body 
feeds on marinated meats and fruits trained to be luscious.   
Once the body had ambitions—to be tall and remain   
soft. No more, but it enjoys rappelling to the water.   
Because the body’s dwelling is stone, perched over water,   
we say the body is privileged. Akin to characters   
in Lawrence books, its livelihood is obscured. It owns   
a horse named Campaign it mounts on foggy morns.   
That was the body’s first lie. It has no horse 
and wouldn’t climb on one. Because the body lives 
so far from others, it likes reading about checkered lives 
on the metrópoli. It likes moving around at night under its dress.   
When it travels, bottles of lotion open in its bags.   
Early in March the big rains came—washing all good thoughts   
from the body’s cracks and chinks. By now the body admits   
it is getting on, and yet, continues to be tormented   
by things being the way they are. Recently the body took   
one of the old trees for a wife, but the union has broken down.   
The light has bored out of the body’s long house.   
Fog envelops its stone flanks. Still the body 
enjoys rappelling to the water. And it likes the twenty four-hour stores, 
walking up and down the aisles, not putting a thing in its basket.


You are part of other people but not
like them. You live in a little wooden box
and wake up with your face
in your palm and some sunlight.
Which is a sign of resignation but not
for you. Which is part of what I meant
by trying to effect change
in myself and also talking. By describing
to you that before a city can become
spectacular its buildings must put on
an iron gown. And then some workers
climb all around it. And it is like having
no teeth because you are waiting
for better teeth. I tell you I am very attached
to my old teeth. In a game called all of this
is hypothetical I did not once slide
my teeth across the table. I do not
even remember what you offered
as the hypothetical exchange for a life
where I only drink soup. There were
some girls on their bikes
and wind. There were some people
reuniting after many years apart or just
a day. You were not like everyone else
making demands with wild
gesticulations. I thought about maybe
trying to sharpen my knowledge
of jokes. I thought about really 
needing a hug. A very important car 
with sirens rumbled by and sounded 
exactly right.


Today there has been so much talk of things exploding
into other things, so much that we all become curious, that we
all run outside into the hot streets
and hug. Romance is a grotto of eager stones
anticipating light, or a girl whose teeth
you can always see. With more sparkle and pop
is the only way to live. Your confetti tongue explodes
into acid jazz. Small typewriters
that other people keep in their eyes
click away at all our farewell parties. It is hard
to pack for the rest of your life. Someone is always
eating cold cucumber noodles. Someone will drop by later
to help dismantle some furniture. A lot can go wrong
if you sleep or think, but the trees go on waving
their broken little hands.



I am the Earth
And the Earth is me.
Each blade of grass,
Each honey tree,
Each bit of mud, 
And stick and stone
Is blood and muscle, 
Skin and bone.

And just as I 
Need every bit
Of me to make
My body fit,
So Earth needs
Grass and stone and tree
And things that grow here
Naturally.

That’s why we 
Celebrate this day.
That’s why across
The world we say:
As long as life,
As dear, as free,
I am the Earth
And the Earth is me. ﻿



The regal eagle sits alone
upon a tree that serves as throne.
But sometimes when the eagle flies
(though this might come as some surprise)
a mob of crows may—wing to wing—
together drive away that king.
Democracy in beak and claw
finds regal eagle's fatal flaw.
And is that legal? I don't know.
You'll have to ask a mobster crow.

The stars are pinned between the leaves   
of the trees, and love is only a harbinger,   
a regular Boy Scout handbook 
of things not to do, and how to do other things,   
small chores you’d never think of,   
and supper gets cold on the table.   
But I can’t leave here without 
taking you with me. 
And the formal customs we once had,   
like wearing red during hunting season,   
are only signposts pointing the way   
in and out of the territories— 
colored leaves floating on the water,   
hesitant, before the rains come.


Every day it is the same.
He comes home.
He tells her about it.
As he speaks, his breath condenses in front of his face.
She goes about her business;
every now and then she looks over.
She doesn’t hear his voice.
She sees the soft fog that continues to form a halo.
She knows he is still talking about that place.
He never tires of it like she does.
Only on summer days when the air is hot
and moisture is still a long time in coming,
she asks him to tell her about that place.
She sits facing him.
Waiting for the first vocalic, non-stops,
the push of air from his lips.
He tells her of the place where clouds are formed.
The cool dampness of his voice is rich.
Even on a dry June day
her face beads with wetness
as he talks directly to her.
Each aspirated sound a gentle burst of coolness.
“Tell me again, tell me again,” she teases.
If he knew she only wanted relief from the heat
and not the story, he would stop talking.
He begins, “The first time I saw the place
where clouds are formed was from
the window of a train . . .”
Another time was in a mirage
in the heat outside Tucson.
Once he thought he saw it
in the dry light of stars.
The place he remembers best
was when he saw it in the eyes
of a woman he spoke to.
When he first noticed it,
she hid it by lowering her gaze.
Soon she let him look freely.
There were times when she opened her eyes
wide, allowing an unobscured view.
Sometimes he saw her eyes smolder
with dryness on a summer day.
Other times she was rich with moisture.
Clouds came in succession. 
The earth’s shadows muted.
“You know the forty days
and forty nights?
I was there.
I’ll be there when it happens again,”
she said with a slight smile.
Like a child, he rushed to look 
into her eyes at every opportunity.
If he could, he would hang on her eye socket,
peering inside, 
marveling at her displays.


II
An unusually cold December day right around Christmas;
clouds, mist find solace in the canyons of the Santa Catalina Mountains.
White moisture quietly moving amid the cactus.
Truly, clouds, wind, and rain are the few elements
that can touch the saguaro from head to foot.
Oblivious of spines, needles.
Rubbery hide surrounded, soothed by elements.
Contact triggers stored heat of remembered summers.
Moisture beads roll forward, unstoppable.
From the city below
we see mist rising, mist rising.


III
We sit close in the cab of the truck.
The weather is cold, wet outside.
Too messy to stand in
waiting for a school bus.
My father’s truck is warm inside,
having been at work since four a.m.
The sound of the engine is soothing,
heater working to capacity.
Inside the cab we are silent.
We don’t need language.
We listen to the regular hum of the engine,
rhythm of the windshield wipers,
soft rain on the hood.
Aware of the cold air
surrounding our temporary shelter.
We look out over the fields
where fog clings to the soil.
Every now and then
with the back of his gloved hand
he wipes the windshield.
“Is it coming yet?”
The three of us sit quietly,
breathing clouds.
Clouds condense as
they contact the coolness of the windows.
My father appears to breathe air
with temperature in balance.
He forms no clouds.
He watches us.
We continue to breathe
gray, soft mist, waiting for the school bus.


Cuk Son is a story.
Tucson is a linguistic alternative.
The story is in the many languages 
still heard in this place of
Black Mountains.
They are in the echo of lost, forgotten languages
heard here even before the people arrived.

The true story of this place 
recalls people walking
deserts all their lives and
continuing today, if only
in their dreams.
The true story is ringing
in their footsteps in a 
place so quiet, they can hear 
their blood moving
through their veins.
Their stories give shape to the 
mountains encircling this place.
Wa:k is the story of
water memories of this desert.

Citizens gravitate to Sabino Canyon.
The humming, buzzing, clicking of water life,
the miracle of desert streams
on smooth boulders.
Rocks, sediment older than life itself 
serve as reminders.
It should be unnecessary for sticky notes
to remind us what a desert place is.
A place dependent on rains of summer,
light dusting of snow,
the rarity of dry beds as rebel rivers.
It is real desert people who lift their faces
upward with the first signs of moisture.
They know how to inhale properly.
Recognizing the aroma of creosote in the distance.
Relieved the cycle is beginning again.
These people are to be commended.

It is others who lament the heat of
a June day, simultaneously
finding pride on surviving
the heat—a dry heat.
These individuals should simply
be tolerated.

Opposed to those who move
from one air-conditioned environment
to another, never acknowledging the heat of summer.
Being grateful for November, when
temperatures drop below eighty,
complaining of the lack of seasons in the desert,
heading for mountains
to see colors—
these people—well, what can we say.
We must feel for the dogs of Tucson.
Who bark as if they belong to somebody and
who, before the rain, wish they were a color other than black.



for Spalding Gray
The West and North winds both lover us, wanting, bitter,
to bring us in close in the small hold.

Tongues loll and laze, while the flap
and snapping above: crazy wanderlust.

The basin must cradle, keep her passengers,
though the hero abandoned the ferry for the real sea.

Is nothing worthy?

        Wallet on bench. Wallet at home. Wallet at rest.

The child, even his cries, must the ship balance,
makes me wild to right this unhumanly keeling.

I have six arms, am the dismembered figurehead,
ballast, breasts covered in blue scales.

I am at rudder, at bow, at mast, at rigging,
at deck, at halyard, at stern, when the hold

explodes with screaming.

One boy has stolen the other’s marble. The boat shifts, tilts.
A wallet washes up against us.

Is this what you meant when you said a family steadied you?

Is this what they see when they see me and my six handless arms,
shining torso and cuspid humor?

The figurehead has no need for eyelids, must
on-guard, vigil, dry eyed.

But she dreams. Dreams.

The sail, its fine apparel, its linen long-shadow: a tiny hand
opening, budlike


listen, a bad thing happened to
my friend’s marriage, can’t tell you
only can tell my own story which
so far isn’t so bad:

“Dad” and I stay married. so far.
so good. so so.

But it felt undoable. This lucky life
every day, every day. every, day.

(all the poetry books the goddamn same
until one guy gets up and stuns the audience.)

Joe Wenderoth, not by a long shot
sober, says, I promised my wife I wouldn’t fuck
anyone to no one in particular and reads a poem
about how Jesus had no penis.

Meanwhile, the psychiatrist, attractive
in a fatherly way, says, Libido question mark.

And your libido?
like a father, but not like mine, or my sons’—

fix it.

My friend Nathan’s almost written
a good novel, by which I mean finished,
which means I’d like to light myself
on fire—this isn’t “desire,”
not what the Dr. meant
by libido?

                                          I hope—

not, it’s just chemical:
              jealousy. boredom. lethargy.

Books with prominent serifs: their feet feet feet I am
marching to the same be—

other

than the neuronic slave I thought anxiety made me
do it, made me get up and carry forth, sally
the children to school the poems dragged
by little hands on their little serifs
to the page, my marriage sustained, remaining
energy: project #1, project #2, broken
fixtures, summer plans, demands met, requests
granted, bunny noodles with and without cheesy
at the same time, and the nighttime, I insomnia
these hours penning invisible letters—

                          till it stopped.

doc said: It’s a syndrome. You’ve got it,
                                          classic.

It’s chemical,
mental
circuitry, we’ve got a fix for this
classic, I’m saying I can

make it better.

Everything was the same, then,
but better.

At night I slept.
In the morning got up.

Kids to school, husband still a fool-
hardy spirit makes
me pick a Monday morning fight, snipe! I’ll pay for that
later I’m still a pain in the 
elbow from writing prose those shift+hold+letter,
I’m still me less sleepy, crazy, I suppose
less crazy-jealous just
haha now at Jesus’ no penis
amazed at the other poet’s kick-ass
friend’s novel I dream instead about
the government makes me put stickers
on my driver’s license of family members
who are Jews, and mine all are. Can they get us
all? I escape with a beautiful light-haired man,
blue-eyed day trader, gentile.

                                                     (( gentle, gentle, mind encased in its
                                                     blood-brain barrier from the harsh skull
                                                     sleep, sleep and sleepy wake and want
                                                     to sleep and sleep a steep dosage—

                                                                      “—chemical?” ))

in my dreams now every man’s mine, no
problem, perhaps my mind’s a little plastic,
malleable, not so fatal now

the dose is engineered like that new genetic watercress
to turn from green to red when planted over buried
mines, nitrogen dioxide makes for early autumn,
red marks the spot where I must
watch my step, up one half-step-dose specific—


The psychiatrist’s lived in NY so long
he’s of ambiguous religion—
everyone’s Jewish sometimes—
writes: “Up the dosage.”

                                                (( now, 
                                                when I’m late I just shrug
                                                it’s my new improved style
                                                missed the train? I tug
                                                the two boys single file 

                                                the platform a safe aisle
                                                between disasters, blithely
                                                I step, step, step lively
                                                carefully, wisely

                                                I sing silly ditties
                                                play I spy something pretty-
                                                gray-brown-metal-filthy
                                                for a little city fun

                                                just one way to enjoy life’s
                                                trials, mile after mile, lucky
                                                to have such dependable feet

                                                you see, the rodents
                                                don’t frighten I’m calm
                                                as can be expected to recover
                                                left to my own devices I was
                                                twice as fast getting everywhere but where
                                                did that get me but, that inevitable location
                                                more waiting, the rats there scurry, scurry, a furry
                                                till the next train comes— ))

“Up the dosage.”

Brown a first-cut brisket in hot Dutch oven
after dusting with paprika. Remove. Sauté
thickly sliced onions and add wine (sweet
is better, lasts forever, never need a new bottle).
Put the meat on onions, cover with tomato-sauce-
onion-soup-mix mixture, cover. Back in low oven
many hours.


This year, I’ll be better;
trying to get out of Egypt.

The house smells like meat.
My hair smells like meat.

I’m a light unto the nation.


Joseph makes sense of the big man’s dreams, is saved,
saves his brothers those jealous boys who sold him
sold them all as slaves. Seven years of plenty. Seven
years of famine. He insomnias the nights counting up
grains, storing, planning, for what? They say throw
the small boys in the river (and mothers do so). Smite
the sons (and fathers do it). God says take off your shoes,
this holy ground this pitiful, incombustible bush.

Is God chemical?
Enzymatic of our great need to chaos?

We’re unforgivable. People of the salted
cheeks. Slap, turn, slap.


To be chosen is to be
unforgiving/unforgiv-
en, always chosen:
be better.


The Zuckers are a long line of obsessives.

This served them well in wartime saw it
coming in time that unseeable thing they
hoarded, they ferried, schemed, paced, got the hell
out figured out at night, insomnia, how to visa—

now, if it happens again, I won’t be
ready—

I’m “better.”

The husband, a country club Jew from Denver,
American intelligentsia, will have to carry me out
and he’s no big man and I’m
not a small girl how fast . . .

can the doctor switch the refugee gene back on?

How fast can I get worse? Smart again and worse?

It is better to be alive than better.

. . . Listen: says the doctor, Sleep isn’t death.
All children unlearn this fear you got confused
thought thinking was the same as—
Writes: “Up the dosage.”

Don’t think. this refugee thing part
of a syndrome fear of medication of being better . . .

Truth is, the anti-obsessional medicine works
wonders and drags me through life’s course.

Light unto the Nation.

About this time of year but years ago
the priests spread rumors of blood libel.
Jews huddled in basements accused
of using Christian babes’ blood
to make unleavened bread.

Signs and wonders.
Christ rises.

Blood and body and babes.
Basements and briskets
and bread of afflictions.

[I] am calm now with my pounds of meat
made and frozen, my party schedule, my pills
of liberation, my gentile dream-boy, American
passport, my gray-haired psychiatrist, my blue-
eyed son, my brown-eyed son, my poems on their
pretty little fleet-feet, my big shot friends, olive-skinned
husband, my right elbow on fire: fire inside deep in the nerve
from too much carrying and word-mongering, smithery, bearing
and tensing, choosing to be better to live this real life this better orbit this Jack

Kerouac never loved you like you wanted—

Blake.
Buddha.
Only Jesus and that’s his shtick,
he loves

everyone: smile! that’s it,
for the camera, blood pressure
normal, better, you’re a poster child
for signs and wonders what a little chemistry
does for the brain, blood, thoughts, hey,

did you know that Pharaoh actually wanted
to let them go? those multitude Jews
but God hardened Paraoh’s heart against them [Jews]
to prove his prowess, show his signs, wonders, outstretched
hand, until the dosage was a perfect ten and then
some, sea closing up around those little chariots
the men and horses while women on the far shore shook
their tambourines. And then what?

                                                            Forty years
to get the small slavery off them.


Because of this. Bloody Nile. My story
one of the lucky. Escaped hatch even from
my own obsess—


                                         I am here because of this.
Because of what my ancestors did for me to tell this
story of the outstretched hand what it did for me this
marked door and behind this red-marked door, around
a corner a blue-eyed boy waits to love me up with his
leavened bread, his slim body, professional detachment,
medical advancments, forgive me my father’s mother’s
father was the last in a long line of rabbis—again! with this? This
rhapsody of affliction and escape, the mind bobbing along
in its watery safe. Be like everyone. Else. Indistinguishable but
better than the other nations. But that’s what got us into this, Allen,
no one writes these long-ass poems anymore. Now we’re
better, all better. All Christian. Kind.


Dead to the world I have failed you
Forgive me, traveller.
 
Thirsty, I was no fountain
Hungry, I was not bread
Tired, I was no pillow
 
Forgive my unwritten poems:
the many I have frozen with irony
the many I have trampled with anger
the many I have rejected in self-defence
the many I have ignored in fear
 
unaware, blind or fearful
I ignored them.
They clamoured everywhere
those unwritten poems.
They sought me out day and night
and I turned them away.
 
Forgive me the colours
they might have worn
Forgive me their eclipsed faces
They dared not venture from
the unwritten lines.
 
Under each inert hour of my silence
died a poem, unheeded


Tell the truth of experience
they say they also
say you must let
go learn to let go
let your children
go
 
and they go
and you stay
letting them go
because you are obedient and
respect everyone’s freedom
to go and you stay
 
and you want to tell the truth
because you are yours truly
its obedient servant
but you can’t because
you’re feeling what you’re not
supposed to feel you have
let them go and go and
 
you can’t say what you feel
because they might read
this poem and feel guilty
and some post-modern hack
will back them up
and make you feel guilty
and stop feeling which is
post-modern and what
you’re meant to feel
 
so you don’t write a poem
you line up words in prose
inside a journal trapped
like a scorpion in a locked
drawer to be opened by
your children let go
after lived life and all the time
a great wave bursting
howls and rears and
 
you have to let go
or you’re gone you’re
gone gasping you
let go
till the next wave
towers crumbles
shreds you to lace—
 
When you wake
your spine is twisted
like a sea-bird
inspecting the sky,
stripped by lightning.


