


from The Spring Flowers Own: “The morning after / my death”

The morning after
my death
we will sit in cafés
but I will not
be there
I will not be
There was the great death of birds
the moon was consumed with fire
the stars were visible
until noon.
Green was the forest drenched
with shadows
the roads were serpentine
A redwood tree stood
alone
with its lean and lit body
unable to follow the
cars that went by with
frenzy
a tree is always an immutable
traveller.
The moon darkened at dawn
the mountain quivered
with anticipation
and the ocean was double-shaded:
the blue of its surface with the
blue of flowers
mingled in horizontal water trails
there was a breeze to
witness the hour
The sun darkened at the
fifth hour of the day
the beach was covered with
conversations
pebbles started to pour into holes
and waves came in like
horses.
The moon darkened on Christmas eve
angels ate lemons
in illuminated churches
there was a blue rug
planted with stars
above our heads
lemonade and war news
competed for our attention
our breath was warmer than
the hills.
There was a great slaughter of
rocks   of spring leaves
of creeks
the stars showed fully
the last king of the Mountain
gave battle
and got killed.
We lay on the grass
covered dried blood with our
bodies
green blades swayed between
our teeth.
We went out to sea
a bank of whales was heading
South
a young man among us a hero
tried to straddle one of the
sea creatures
his body emerged as a muddy pool
as mud we waved goodbye to his remnants
happy not to have to bury
him in the early hours of the day
We got drunk in a barroom
the small town of Fairfax
had just gone to bed
cherry trees were bending under the
weight of their flowers:
they were involved in a ceremonial
dance to which no one
had ever been invited.
I know flowers to be funeral companions
they make poisons and venoms
and eat abandoned stone walls
I know flowers shine stronger
than the sun
their eclipse means the end of
times
but I love flowers for their treachery
their fragile bodies
grace my imagination’s avenues
without their presence
my mind would be an unmarked
grave.
We met a great storm at sea
looked back at the
rocking cliffs
the sand was going under
black birds were
leaving
the storm ate friends and foes
alike
water turned into salt for
my wounds.
Flowers end in frozen patterns
artificial gardens cover
the floors
we get up close to midnight
search with powerful lights
the tiniest shrubs on the
meadows
A stream desperately is running to
the ocean



from The Manifestations of the Voyage

my house’s stairway is seized
with vertigo.
Matter having forsaken its laws,
we land in hell,
ascending to heaven.
Shadows move along ladders
under the silence of ordinary things
there is another silence:
it belongs neither to the leaves not to the dead
with a crown of birds circling
him
a child is running in an abandoned house
the stairway takes the measure of
its own emptiness
I myself am the stairway that
Time has used in its
funeral course
wheels lift water in the 
gardens of Hama
and come down
not waiting for the river
to put out the fire
Here we are left with
the river Seine and Paris’s poisons.
I prefer gardens where
linden trees get ready for
a lunar voyage
The stairway that separates my
room from my memory
whispers in my ear . . .
I am not at the mercy of men
since trees live in my fantasies
men and trees long for fire
and call for the rain
I love rains which carry desires to oceans.
Between one airplane and another space is disoriented
stars sneak into holes and brides
go naked to wells
their innocence wanes under our eyes
You and I are made from a worm-eaten wood
The Word has sunk
we are left with no cry gesture
or gaze
silence to us is forbidden.
We are threatened neither by life nor by death
nor forced to admire the Spring
I found earth-castles on the edge
of the desert’s torrents
I took their marble stairs
but could not find my way either
up or down
then I understood that I was
in a state of non-reason
and non-madness
and that the gardens of Andalusia
were standing
ready to die.
Two cities
Two tears
Let insanity keep between its skirts
legs within its black eyes
the fright of my adolescence
and the nocturnal walk on the hills:
which hill?
I mean the kingdom that a man carries
in his gut when his love’s fulfilled.
Two cities which are neither Beirut nor Damascus
two tears: neither of alcohol nor of rain
Yes there has been a truck and a blue-eyed woman from Russia
—grey olive tree—
I was a butterfly caught by a fire:
neither the day’s not the night’s but the incandescence that radiates from the body like a receding sickness,
Let tombs stay open!
The stairway which leads to my room
borrows its metals from Babylon
The Prophet’s Ascension
had two movements
we fell into whirlpools of mud and the wind followed his horse
A tempest went after the sun’s steps
The Prophet swam through waves of clouds
a river of gold carried his vessel
and away from the sun he reached Paradise
a Paradise made of light.
The stairway which leads to my room
leads to an observatory
I own two telescopes to observe stars and black holes
and take mechanized stairs which advance with no advance
my hair spins with sunflowers
Illegitimate is this linden tree
which shakes by my door
let us get ready for Hell!
Cursed be messengers
tossing about water’s tranquility
and building forest fences
Oh that the wind go quicker than us!
that we be smothered by light!
This linden tree standing by my door
weights heavy on my days
I will finally marry it
and we shall bring children
condemned to terror
this tree looks at me
with insistence:
It will be kept waiting
until Time’s end.



Apollo

We pull off to a road shack in Massachusetts to watch men walk on the moon.
We did the same thing for three two one blast off, and now we watch the same men bounce in and out of craters.
I want a Coke and a hamburger. 
Because the men are walking on the moon which is now irrefutably not green, not cheese, not a shiny dime floating in a cold blue, 
the way I'd thought, 
the road shack people don't notice we are a black family not from there,   
the way it mostly goes.   
This talking through static, bounces in space- boots, tethered to cords is much stranger, stranger even than we are.



Raw Meditations on Money, 1. She Speaks: A School Teacher from South India

Portions of a mango tree the storm cut down, 
a green blaze bent into mud 
and they come to me, at dawn
three girls from Kanpur, far to the north admittedly 
(we know this from national geography class, 
the borders of states, the major cities).
They hung themselves from fans.
In the hot air they hung themselves
so that their father would not be forced to tender gold
he did not have, would not be forced
to work his fists to bone.
So that is how a portion of the story goes.
Slowly in the hot air they swung, three girls. 
How old were they?
Of marriageable age certainly.
Sixteen, seventeen, and eighteen, something of that sort.
How do I feel about it?
What a question! I am one of three sisters,
most certainly I do not want father to proffer money
he does not have for my marriage.
Get a scooter, a refrigerator, a horde of utensils,
silks, and tiny glittering bits of gold
to hang about my ears and throat.
Gold is labor time accumulated . . . labor time defined.
Who said that? Yes, I am a schoolteacher, fifth standard 
trained in Indian history and geography, 
Kerala University, first class first.
The storm tree puts out its limbs and
I see three girls swinging. One of them is me.
Step back I tell myself.
Saumiya, step back. The whole history 
of womankind is compacted here. 
Open your umbrella, tuck your sari tight,
breathe into the strokes of catastrophe,
and let the school bus wait.
You will get to it soon enough and the small, hot faces.
See how the monsoon winds soar and shunt 
tropic air into a house of souls, 
a doorway stopped by clouds.
Set your feet into broken stones 
and this red earth and pouring rain. 
For us there is no exile.



California Prodigal

The eye follows, the land 
Slips upward, creases down, forms   
The gentle buttocks of a young   
Giant. In the nestle, 
Old adobe bricks, washed of   
Whiteness, paled to umber, 
Await another century. 
Star Jasmine and old vines 
Lay claim upon the ghosted land,   
Then quiet pools whisper   
Private childhood secrets. 
Flush on inner cottage walls   
Antiquitous faces, 
Used to the gelid breath 
Of old manors, glare disdainfully   
Over breached time. 
Around and through these   
Cold phantasmatalities,   
He walks, insisting 
To the languid air, 
Activity, music, 
A generosity of graces. 
His lupin fields spurn old 
Deceit and agile poppies dance 
In golden riot.   Each day is 
Fulminant, exploding brightly   
Under the gaze of his exquisite   
Sires, frozen in the famed paint   
Of dead masters. Audacious   
Sunlight casts defiance 
At their feet.



the moment

The moment when, after many years
of hard work and a long voyage
you stand in the centre of your room,
house, half-acre, square mile, island, country,
knowing at last how you got there,
and say, I own this,
is the same moment when the trees unloose
their soft arms from around you,
the birds take back their language,
the cliffs fissure and collapse,
the air moves back from you like a wave
and you can't breathe.
No, they whisper. You own nothing.
You were a visitor, time after time
climbing the hill, planting the flag, proclaiming.
We never belonged to you.
You never found us.
It was always the other way round. 



helen of troy does countertop dancing

The world is full of women
who'd tell me I should be ashamed of myself
if they had the chance. Quit dancing.
Get some self-respect
and a day job.
Right. And minimum wage,
and varicose veins, just standing
in one place for eight hours
behind a glass counter
bundled up to the neck, instead of 
naked as a meat sandwich.
Selling gloves, or something.
Instead of what I do sell.
You have to have talent 
to peddle a thing so nebulous
and without material form.
Exploited, they'd say. Yes, any way
you cut it, but I've a choice
of how, and I'll take the money.
I do give value.
Like preachers, I sell vision,
like perfume ads, desire
or its facsimile. Like jokes
or war, it's all in the timing.
I sell men back their worse suspicions:
that everything's for sale,
and piecemeal. They gaze at me and see
a chain-saw murder just before it happens,
when thigh, ass, inkblot, crevice, tit, and nipple
are still connected.
Such hatred leaps in them,
my beery worshippers! That, or a bleary
hopeless love. Seeing the rows of heads 
and upturned eyes, imploring
but ready to snap at my ankles,
I understand floods and earthquakes, and the urge 
to step on ants. I keep the beat,
and dance for them because
they can't. The music smells like foxes,
crisp as heated metal
searing the nostrils
or humid as August, hazy and languorous
as a looted city the day after,
when all the rape's been done
already, and the killing,
and the survivors wander around
looking for garbage
to eat, and there's only a bleak exhaustion.
Speaking of which, it's the smiling
tires me out the most. 
This, and the pretence
that I can't hear them.
And I can't, because I'm after all
a foreigner to them.
The speech here is all warty gutturals,
obvious as a slab of ham,
but I come from the province of the gods
where meanings are lilting and oblique.
I don't let on to everyone,
but lean close, and I'll whisper:
My mother was raped by a holy swan.
You believe that? You can take me out to dinner. 
That's what we tell all the husbands.
There sure are a lot of dangerous birds around.
Not that anyone here
but you would understand.
The rest of them would like to watch me
and feel nothing. Reduce me to components
as in a clock factory or abattoir.
Crush out the mystery.
Wall me up alive
in my own body. 
They'd like to see through me, 
but nothing is more opaque
than absolute transparency.
Look--my feet don't hit the marble!
Like breath or a balloon, I'm rising,
I hover six inches in the air
in my blazing swan-egg of light.
You think I'm not a goddess?
Try me.
This is a torch song.
Touch me and you'll burn. 


siren song

This is the one song everyone
would like to learn: the song
that is irresistible:
the song that forces men
to leap overboard in squadrons
even though they see beached skulls
the song nobody knows
because anyone who had heard it
is dead, and the others can’t remember.
Shall I tell you the secret
and if I do, will you get me
out of this bird suit?
I don’t enjoy it here
squatting on this island
looking picturesque and mythical
with these two feathery maniacs,
I don’t enjoy singing
this trio, fatal and valuable.
I will tell the secret to you,
to you, only to you.
Come closer. This song
is a cry for help: Help me!
Only you, only you can,
you are unique
at last. Alas
it is a boring song
but it works every time. 


this is a photograph of me

It was taken some time ago
At first it seems to be
a smeared
print: blurred lines and grey flecks
blended with the paper;
then, as you scan
it, you can see something in the left-hand corner
a thing that is like a branch: part of a tree
(balsam or spruce) emerging
and, to the right, halfway up
what ought to be a gentle
slope, a small frame house.
In the background there is a lake,
and beyond that, some low hills.
(The photograph was taken
the day after I drowned.
I am in the lake, in the center
of the picture, just under the surface.
It is difficult to say where
precisely, or to say
how large or how small I am:
the effect of water
on light is a distortion.
but if you look long enough
eventually
you will see me.) 



Is/Not

Love is not a profession
genteel or otherwise
sex is not dentistry
the slick filling of aches and cavities
you are not my doctor
you are not my cure,
nobody has that
power, you are merely a fellow/traveller
Give up this medical concern,
buttoned, attentive,
permit yourself anger
and permit me mine
which needs neither
your approval nor your surprise
which does not need to be made legal
which is not against a disease
but against you,
which does not need to be understood
or washed or cauterized,
which needs instead
to be said and said.
Permit me the present tense. 


Do Not Make Things Too Easy

Do not make things too easy. 
There are rocks and abysses in the mind 
As well as meadows. 
There are things knotty and hard: intractable. 
Do not talk to me of love and understanding. 
I am sick of blandishments. 
I want the rock to be met by a rock. 
If I am vile, and behave hideously, 
Do not tell me it was just a misunderstanding.



The Albatross

When I know you are coming home
I put on this necklace:
glass beads on a silken thread,
a blue that used to match my eyes.
I like to think I am remembering you.
I like to think you don’t forget.
The necklace lies heavy on my skin,
it clatters when I reach down
to lift my screaming child.
I swing her, roll her in my arms until she forgets.
The beads glitter in the flicker of a TV set
as I sit her on my lap
and wish away the afternoon.
I wait until I hear a gate latch lift
the turn of key in lock.
I sit amongst toys and unwashed clothes,
I sit and she fingers the beads until you speak
in a voice that no longer seems familiar, only strange.
I turn as our child tugs at the string.
I hear a snap and a sound like falling rain.



The Reservoir

The reservoir is trying to freeze over
with an expanding map shaped like an angel
Separated lovers on a coast keep walking
toward each other. Low sun reddens 
their faces without heat
They are weary of always moving
so seldom touching, but never think
to move inland, massive and stable
Imagoes hatched on thin ice, it’s 
their illusion membranes are brighter
than occluded flesh of interiors
Membranes have the density
of an edge, and edges violent as lava
All day she walked across the tundra
He began to drive away obliquely
at exactly her speed, so she altered 
her angle, aiming above him, as in a current
He departed in a zone that solidified 
at his whim, so she reached for his hand
Land cracked with their weight. He seemed
to reach toward her, a hand like paper
twisted and folded over, only a surface
with wan modulations, like a map
Then she delicately stepped out
toward the edge, tenuous as a leaf
as if waiting for a letter
but it froze too swiftly before her
At dusk his voice broke her concentration
She turned, vexed, and saw he had not spoken.



Tan Tien

As usual, the first gate was modest. It is dilapidated. She can’t tell
which bridge crossed the moat, which all cross sand now, disordered with footsteps.
It’s a precise overlay of circles on squares, but she has trouble locating
the main avenue and retraces her steps in intense heat for the correct entrance,
which was intentionally blurred, the  way a round arch can give onto a red wall,
far enough in back of the arch for sun to light.
If being by yourself separates from your symmetry, which is
the axis of your spine in the concrete sense, but becomes a suspension
in your spine like a layer of sand under the paving stones of a courtyard
or on a plain, you have to humbly seek out a person who can listen to you,
on a street crowded with bicycles at night, their bells ringing.
And any stick or straight line you hold can be your spine,
like a map she is following in French of Tan Tien. She wants space to fall
to each side of her like traction, not weight dispersed within a mirror. At any time,
an echo of what she says will multiply against the walls in balanced,
dizzying jumps like a gyroscope in the heat, but she is alone. 
Later, she would remember herself as a carved figure and its shadow on a blank board,
but she is her balancing stick, and the ground to each side of her is its length,
disordered once by an armored car, and once by an urn of flowers at a crossing.
The stick isn’t really the temple’s bisection around her, like solstice or ancestor.
This Tang Dynasty peach tree would be parallel levitation in the spine 
the person recording it.
Slowly the hall looms up. The red stair’s outline gives way to its duration
as it extends and rises at a low angle.
In comparison to the family, the individual hardly counts, but they all
wait for her at a teahouse inside the wall.
First the gold knob, then blue tiers above the highest step,
the same color as the sky. 
When one person came to gain confidence,
she imagines he felt symmetry as flight after his fast among seven meteorites
in the dark. He really felt like a globe revolving within a globe.
Even the most singular or indivisible particle or heavenly sphere will adjust
when the axis extending beyond itself is pushed, or the sphere it is within
is pushed. What she thought was her balance flattens into a stylized dragon
on the marble paving stones. 
Yet she’s reluctant to leave the compound. Only the emperor
could walk its center line. Now, anyone can imagine how it felt
to bring heaven news. She is trying to remember this in Hong Kong
as the tram pulls suddenly above skyscrapers and the harbor
and she flattens against her seat, like a reversal occurring in the poles,
or what she meant by, no one can imagine how. 



Westray: 1991

Then the day passed into the evening, 
a sovereign, darkening blue. And 
the twenty-six lost miners, 
if living at all, knew nothing of the hour: 
not the languid canter 
of light, or the wind 
curled through the hedgerows. Not pain. 
Not rage. If living at all then 
just this: a worm of black water 
at the lower back. At the lungs 
two tablets of air. 
What is it like there? the broadcaster asked, 
his voice and the slow reply 
cast down through the time zones of America. 
A stillness. All of the families 
asleep in the fire station. 
And the mineworks pale on the landscape. 
What else? 
Nothing. Blue lights of police cars. 
What else? 
Nothing. 
Nothing? 
...The thrum of the crickets. 
A thousand files on a thousand scrapers. 
A thousand taut membranes called mirrors
amplifying the breed-song. A landscape of cupped wings 
amplifying the breed-song. A thousand bodies 
summoned to a thousand bodiesand the song itself a body, 
so in tune with the dusk's warmth 
it slows when a cloud passes over. 
Today. Tomorrow. In that May Nova Scotia darkness 
when the earth flared and collapsed. 
Before that May. After that darkness. 
On the larch bud. On the fire station. 
On shale and the grind-steps of magma. 
On the gold straining in its seam bed. 
On the coal straining. On the twenty-six headlamps 
swaying through the drift tunnels. On the bud. 
On the leaves, on the meadow grass, 
on the wickerwork of shrubs: 
dark cape of desire. 



Windows

When the cow died by the green sapling, 
her limp udder splayed on the grass 
like something from the sea, we offered 
our words in their low calibrations— 
which was our fashion—then severed 
her horns with a pug-toothed blade 
and pounded them out to an amber 
transparency, two sheets that became, 
in their moth-wing haze, our parlor windows. 
They softened our guests with the gauze-light 
of the Scriptures, and rendered to us, 
on our merriest days, the sensation 
of gazing through the feet of a gander. 
In time we moved up to the status 
of glass—one pane, then two—each 
cupping in proof of its purity 
a dimple of fault, a form of distortion 
enhancing our image. We took the panes 
with us from cottage to cottage, 
moth-horn and glass, and wedged up 
the misfitted gaps with a poultice 
of gunny and wax. When woodsmoke 
darkened our bricks, we gave 
to the windowsills a lacquer 
of color—clear blue with a lattice 
of yellow: a primary entrance and exit 
for light. And often, walking home 
from the river and small cheese shop, 
we would squint their colors to a sapling 
green, and remember the hull 
of that early body, the slap of fear 
we suffered there, then the little wash 
of recovery that is our fashion—how 
we stroked to her bones a cadenced droning, 
and took back from her absence, our 
amber, half-literal method of sight. 



At Least Two Types of People

There are  at  least two  types of people,  the  first for  whom the  ordinary 
worldliness is easy.  The  regular  social routines  and  material  cares  are 
nothing too external to them and easily absorbed. They are not alien from
the  creation  and  maintenance of the world, and the world does not treat
them  as  alien. And also, from  them, the efforts  toward the world, and to 
them,  the  fulfillment  of the  world's  moderate desires, flow. They are ef-
fortless at eating, moving, arranging their arms as they sit or stand,  being
hired, being paid, cleaning up,  spending, playing, mating.  They are in an
ease and comfort. The world is for the world and for them.
Then there are those over whom the events and opportunities of the every-
day  world wash  over.  There  is  rarely,  in this  second type, any easy kind 
of absorption.  There  is only  a  visible  evidence  of having  been made of a 
different  substance,  one that  repels.  Also, from them,  it is almost impos-
sible  to  give  to  the  world  what  it will  welcome or reward. For how does
this  second  type  hold  their arms?  Across their chest? Behind their back? 
And  how  do  they  find  food  to eat  and  then prepare this food? And how 
do  they  receive  a  check or endorse it? And what also of the difficulties of
love  or  being loved, its  expansiveness,  the way it is used for markets and 
indentured moods?
And what is this  second  substance?  And how does it come  to have as one
of  its  qualities  the  resistance of the world  as it is?  And also,  what is  the 
person  made  of  the  second  substance?   Is this a  human or more or  less 
than one? Where is the true impermeable community of the second human
whose  arms  do  not  easily  arrange  themselves and for whom the salaries 
and  weddings  and  garages do not come?
These are, perhaps, not two sorts of persons, but two kinds of fortune. The
first is soft and regular. The second is a baffled kind, and magnetic only  to 
the second substance, and made itself out of a different, second, substance,
and having, at its end, a second, and almost blank-faced, reward.



Playa Colorada

It was a beach
like all beaches, only perhaps more beautiful.
And the sand was pink not red.
We would arrive in caravans,
hampers overflowing with food and drink
like Aziz and his party on the way to Malabar.
The colonials and their servants away on an outing.
We would stop under thatch umbrellas,
towels and tablecloths spread out against the sea.
My mother in her skirted swim suit
surrounded by fathers of other children,
her olive skin lit through her straw hat.
They would laugh and drink beer
and leer
while the children did the usual beach things,
boring futile tunnels to China, running
at waves and then away,
daring each other to be swallowed.
I would go out by the forbidden rocks and pick off oysters,
then give them to the men to pry open,
cover with lime juice and suck dry.
Once, I saw my mother sucking
an oyster out of another daddy’s hand.
Her dappled face bobbed and smiled and her tongue
searched the shell for pearls.



Smooth Horizon of the Verb Love

an urban image from the eighties
when we hung out at Chez Madam Arthur
and at the back of the room
women wrapped their arms around
nights of ink and dawn
calendar of murmurs
vague caresses about the planet and its water
we could have confused words
but there were doors open
confetti in the midst of darkness
gentle ways
to swoon in a corner with she who
put her tongue in my mouth
focus on yes, on the woman’s
eyelids
caress not silence not word
focus beyond. Hold me back



The Guinea Pig and the Green Balloon

I approached the luminous stranger who came to me 
from darkness in a gown of lettuce leaves, in a velvet 
cloak of green that appeared at first another piece of dark, 
but pulled apart into the glow-sphere that danced 
in swaying steps, the lucent majesty that slipped toward me 
from the reigning silence black above my cage. 
Oh extravagant—and were my teeth too sharp to greet 
or sharp enough? I do not understand now what was meant 
to happen and what was a mistake—but know the bursting, 
the sickening snap of ecstasy wrenched back to the body 
and the green gown flung in crippled circles traced 
like diagrams of wasting moons above my head—or portals 
to another world, I thought, but as I thought, the shriek 
dissolved, the body crumpled from the air and landed 
on its side beneath the salt lick. All night I tended 
the wasted skin and careful, brought it water, 
alfalfa, made a bed of cedar chips and tried to gather 
molecules of breath that floated from the plant shelf. 
When I remembered morning, I began to cry, began to pray 
for night to stay until the green took shape again 
and if that shape were gone, I prayed for night 
to stay, to be held in the same forever-dark
in which I first looked up and saw the gentle body,
and saw the graceful swaying of the stranger coming
as if for me—now I do not know—but then,
as if for me, and all my loneliness gone.



The Sheep Who Fastened the Sky to the Ground

After I found out that you were a sheep, 
it was always afternoon, and I stood trembling 
at the pasture fence, my hands full of dandelion 
and the longer grasses. How could I call you 
to come near? We had no names and only 
this place, this sun, the hill and its limitless sky 
held together by your gentle outline as you leaned 
toward tufts of grass. How beautiful you were, 
so still, so close to moving. I gathered 
bouquets of clover, strung violets from the fence slats. 
Sometimes I whispered, but the words disappeared 
before I knew what they were or what they meant.   
Once I saw darkness. I remember my eyes were open 
and there was nothing, only black, and my heart aching 
as I felt for my face and I was still human. While I cried,
stars came and traced sheep in the sky and the voice that knew 
never spoke. I fell asleep mistaking the scent of hay 
for your breath. To wake once from the sleep in which 
you are held, in which your name emanates without utterance 
from the being that cradles you—There is no other sleep. 
Now it is always afternoon. How can I call you 
when we have no names? I search 
for the clover and violets. There are always enough. 
My shadow is always the same length and shaped 
with arms and legs. Between us, the distance of field is green 
and exact; the sun gleams from its cloudless height—I know 
that there is enough time, that there is always enough.   
Please. Come to me, remember me: undo this world.



The Wind Chimes

Two wind chimes, 
one brass and prone to anger, 
one with the throat of an angel, 
swing from my porch eave, 
sing with the storm. 
Last year I lived five months 
under that shrill choir, 
boxing your house, crowding books 
into crates, from some pages 
your own voice crying. 
Some days the chimes raged. 
Some days they hung still. 
They fretted when I dug up 
the lily I gave you in April, 
blooming, strangely, in fall. 
Together, they scolded me 
when I counted pennies you left 
in each can, cup, and drawer, 
when I rechecked the closets 
for remnants of you. 
The last day, the house empty, 
resonant with space, the two chimes 
had nothing to toll for. 
I walked out, took them down, 
carried our mute spirits home.



The New Experience

I was ready for a new experience.
All the old ones had burned out.
They lay in little ashy heaps along the roadside
And blew in drifts across the fairgrounds and fields.
From a distance some appeared to be smoldering 
But when I approached with my hat in my hands
They let out small puffs of smoke and expired.
Through the windows of houses I saw lives lit up
With the otherworldly glow of TV
And these were smoking a little bit too.
I flew to Rome. I flew to Greece.
I sat on a rock in the shade of the Acropolis
And conjured dusky columns in the clouds.
I watched waves lap the crumbling coast.
I heard wind strip the woods.
I saw the last living snow leopard
Pacing in the dirt. Experience taught me
That nothing worth doing is worth doing
For the sake of experience alone.
I bit into an apple that tasted sweetly of time.
The sun came out. It was the old sun
With only a few billion years left to shine. 



reading

there were so many books. she had to separate them to avoid being overwhelmed by the excessive implications of their words. she kept hundreds in a series of boxes inside a wire cage in a warehouse. and hundreds more on the shelves of her various rooms. when she changed houses she would pack some of the books into the boxes and exchange them for others that had been hibernating. these resurrected books were precious to her for a while. they had assumed the patinas of dusty chthonic wisdoms. and thus she would let them sit on the shelves admiring them from a distance. gathering time and air. she did not want to be intimate with their insides. the atmospherics suggested by the titles were enough. sometimes she would increase the psychic proximities between herself and the books and place a pile of them on the floor next to her bed. and quite possibly she absorbed their intentions while she slept.
if she intended travelling beyond a few hours she would occasionally remove a book from the shelves and place it in her bag. she carried ‘the poetics of space’ round india for three months and it returned to her shelves undamaged at the completion of the journey. every day of those three months she touched it and read some of the titles of its chapters to make sure it was there. and real. chapters called house and universe, nests, shells, intimate immensity, miniatures and, the significance of the hut. she had kept it in a pocket of her bag together with a coloured whistle and an acorn. she now kept this book in the darkness of her reference shelf. and she knew that one day she would have to admit to herself that this was the only book she had need of, that this was the book she would enter the pages of, that this was the book she was going to read



In the Kitchen

It’s right before you drive away:
our limbs still warm with sleep,
coffee sputtering out, the north
wind, your hips pressing me
hard against the table. I like it hard
because I need to remember this.
I want to say harder. How we must
look to the road that’s gone,
to the splayed morning of cold
butter and inveterate greed.
Light comes and goes in the field.
Oranges in a bowl, garlic, radio.
In the story of us, no one wins.
Isolation is a new theme
someone says. By now
I’ve invented you. Most people
don’t like to touch dead things.
That’s what my friend tells me
when I find my fish on the floor.
It must have wanted an out.
Sometimes my desire scares me.
Sometimes I watch football
and think: four chances
is enough to get there. But 
we don’t have helmets.
I want to say harder,
I can take it, but
there’s no proof I can.



Summer Solstice

I wanted to see where beauty comes from
without you in the world, hauling my heart 
across sixty acres of northeast meadow,
my pockets filling with flowers.
Then I remembered,
it’s you I miss in the brightness
and body of every living name:
rattlebox, yarrow, wild vetch.
You are the green wonder of June,
root and quasar, the thirst for salt.
When I finally understand that people fail
at love, what is left but cinquefoil, thistle,
the paper wings of the dragonfly
aeroplaning the soul with a sudden blue hilarity?
If I get the story right, desire is continuous,
equatorial. There is still so much
I want to know: what you believe
can never be removed from us,
what you dreamed on Walnut Street
in the unanswerable dark of your childhood,
learning pleasure on your own.
Tell me our story: are we impetuous,
are we kind to each other, do we surrender
to what the mind cannot think past?
Where is the evidence I will learn
to be good at loving?
The black dog orbits the horseshoe pond
for treefrogs in their plangent emergencies.
There are violet hills,
there is the covenant of duskbirds.
The moon comes over the mountain
like a big peach, and I want to tell you
what I couldn’t say the night we rushed
North, how I love the seriousness of your fingers
and the way you go into yourself,
calling my half-name like a secret.
I stand between taproot and treespire.
Here is the compass rose
to help me live through this.
Here are twelve ways of knowing
what blooms even in the blindness
of such longing. Yellow oxeye,
viper’s bugloss with its set of pink arms
pleading do not forget me.
We hunger for eloquence.
We measure the isopleths.
I am visiting my life with reckless plenitude.
The air is fragrant with tiny strawberries.
Fireflies turn on their electric wills:
an effulgence. Let me come back
whole, let me remember how to touch you
before it is too late.



Christmas, 1970

We assemble the silver tree,
our translated lives,
its luminous branches,
numbered to fit into its body.
place its metallic roots
to decorate our first Christmas.
Mother finds herself
opening, closing the Red Cross box
she will carry into 1976
like an unwanted door prize,
a timepiece, a stubborn fact,
an emblem of exile measuring our days,
marked by the moment of our departure,
our lives no longer arranged.
Somewhere,
there is a photograph,
a Polaroid Mother cannot remember was ever taken:
I am sitting under Tia Tere’s Christmas tree,
her first apartment in this, our new world:
my sisters by my side,
I wear a white dress, black boots,
an eight-year-old’s resignation;
Mae and Mitzy, age four,
wear red and white snowflake sweaters and identical smiles,
on this, our first Christmas,
away from ourselves.
The future unreal, unmade,
Mother will cry into the new year
with Lidia and Emerito,
our elderly downstairs neighbors,
who realize what we are too young to understand:
Even a map cannot show you
the way back to a place
that no longer exists.



A un Desconocido

I was looking for your hair, 
black as old lava on an island   
of white coral. I dreamed it   
deserted you and came for me,   
wrapped me in its funeral ribbons   
and tied me a bow of salt. 
Here’s where I put my demise:   
desiring fire in a web of tide,   
marrying the smell of wet ashes   
to the sweet desert of your slate. 
My intelligent mammal, male 
of my species, twin sun to a world   
not of my making, you reduce me   
to the syrup of the moon, you boil   
my bones in the absence of hands. 
Where is your skin, parting me? 
Where is the cowlick under your kiss   
teasing into purple valleys? Where   
are your wings, the imaginary tail 
and its exercise? Where would I breed   
you? In the neck of my secret heart   
where you’ll go to the warmth of me   
biting into that bread where crumbs crack   
and scatter and feed us our souls; 
if only you were a stone I could   
throw, if only I could have you.



Empress Dowager Boogies

Last night I found my face below
the water in my cupped hands.
The mask made of copper and bone
criss-crossing to make a smirk,
a false glamour, a plated glaze.
I unwound myself from the heavy
machinery of my body's burden.
The lute, the light, chime.
I'll get up and partner myself
with music, the purple moon
peeling itself like a plum.
Men stand in a circle and
they will ask and ask again.
I want to pick the thick bud,
to lose myself in the body's posture
bending in or away, to let
my majesty and birthright go 
and gesture toward a waking life.



my dream about being white

hey music and me 
only white, 
hair a flutter of 
fall leaves 
circling my perfect 
line of a nose, 
no lips, 
no behind, hey 
white me 
and i’m wearing 
white history 
but there’s no future 
in those clothes 
so i take them off and 
wake up 
dancing. 



El Olvido

It is a dangerous thing
to forget the climate of your birthplace,
to choke out the voices of dead relatives
when in dreams they call you
by your secret name.
It is dangerous
to spurn the clothes you were born to wear
for the sake of fashion; dangerous
to use weapons and sharp instruments
you are not familiar with; dangerous
to disdain the plaster saints
before which your mother kneels
praying with embarrassing fervor
that you survive in the place you have chosen to live:
a bare, cold room with no pictures on the walls,
a forgetting place where she fears you will die
of loneliness and exposure.
Jesús, María, y José, she says, 
el olvido is a dangerous thing.



Requiem for a Nest

the winged thang built her dream palace
amid the fine green eyes of a sheltering bough
she did not know it was urban turf
disguised as serenely delusionally rural
nor did she know the neighborhood was rife
with slant-mawed felines and those long-taloned
swoopers of prey. she was ignorant of the acidity & oil
that slowly polluted the earth, and was never
to detect the serpent coiled one strong limb below

following her nature she flitted and dove
for whatever blades twigs and mud
could be found under the humming blue
and created a hatchery for her spawn
not knowing all were doomed



Litany

Tom, will you let me love you in your restaurant?
I will let you make me a sandwich of your invention and I will eat it and call 
it a carolyn sandwich. Then you will kiss my lips and taste the mayon­naise and 
that is how you shall love me in my restaurant
Tom, will you come to my empty beige apartment and help me set up my daybed?
Yes, and I will put the screws in loosely so that when we move on it, later, 
it will rock like a cradle and then you will know you are my baby
Tom, I am sitting on my dirt bike on the deck. Will you come out from the kitchen
and watch the people with me?
Yes, and then we will race to your bedroom. I will win and we will tangle up 
on your comforter while the sweat rains from our stomachs and fore­heads
Tom, the stars are sitting in tonight like gumball gems in a little girl’s 
jewelry box. Later can we walk to the duck pond?
Yes, and we can even go the long way past the jungle gym. I will push you on 
the swing, but promise me you’ll hold tight. If you fall I might disappear
Tom, can we make a baby together? I want to be a big pregnant woman with a 
loved face and give you a squalling red daughter. 
No, but I will come inside you and you will be my daughter
Tom, will you stay the night with me and sleep so close that we are one person? 
No, but I will lie down on your sheets and taste you. There will be feathers 
of you on my tongue and then I will never forget you
Tom, when we are in line at the convenience store can I put my hands in your 
back pockets and my lips and nose in your baseball shirt and feel the crook 
of your shoulder blade? 
No, but later you can lie against me and almost touch me and when I go I will 
leave my shirt for you to sleep in so that always at night you will be pressed 
up against the thought of me
Tom, if I weep and want to wait until you need me will you promise that someday 
you will need me?
No, but I will sit in silence while you rage, you can knock the chairs down 
any mountain. I will always be the same and you will always wait
Tom, will you climb on top of the dumpster and steal the sun for me? It’s just 
hanging there and I want it. 
No, it will burn my fingers. No one can have the sun: it’s on loan from God. 
But I will draw a picture of it and send it to you from Richmond and then you 
can smooth out the paper and you will have a piece of me as well as the sun
Tom, it’s so hot here, and I think I’m being born. Will you come back from
Richmond and baptise me with sex and cool water?
I will come back from Richmond. I will smooth the damp spiky hairs from the 
back of your neck and then I will lick the salt off it. Then I will leave
Tom, Richmond is so far away. How will I know how you love me? 
I have left you. That is how you will know



Superfly

Tired of waiting for him, I think of a plan to stick it to the 
Man—he waylaid me with promises: protection, his valuable keys. 
Nights of seduction, I would glide to the curb in my customized Eldorado, 
black finish and cool bubble top 
and turn it over to a superyoung girl with rags and a bucket of soapy 
water, with a smile and a dead president, make it shine my sister. 
He is inside listening to Curtis, his sapphire ring 
he brings the moon with him, this cat, and his eyes glow like 
mellow stones at my superfly threads. The cashmere white stitched suit, 
the maxi coat trimmed in fox fur: vixen, 
my pretty little hat with three blue feather plumes. I let him dig me for a while, 
and lay a kiss, a spoon of cocaine on him, our secret meetings 
a potent rush and I am hip to the hit to his fly hand on my thigh, 
my ladies scatter in a cloud of Opium and he tells me, 
you know me, I’m your friend. 
I thought he was my man—I flash on him in the bathtub, its ledge of oils in flasks, 
pulling a loofah sponge over my tired shoulders, passing a reefer in lemon paper, 
on all the tired bitches working his keys, hustling his diamond rocks— 
two sets of false eyelashes, micro minis, freezing their asses off. 
My .25 Beretta can’t stop him, it’s not real, I’m not real to him. He’ll 
use me up and kill me; I need brains guts and cool; 
I put fur on your back, my baby, he says. 
I am between him and death, the greatest high of all, and I ask him to step outside. 
The pink flakes blow my mind and I turn to him with a flurry of karate kicks, 
kicking out my left leg I bring him to the ground 
and with my foot on the collar of his mohair suit I tell him, I took your 
money and signed a contract on you: I hired the best killers there are— 
men like you—yeah, if one hair on my gorgeous head is harmed, it’s all over for you. 
It’s all over for you, I think, as I imagine I am Superfly; my mind is what I want it to be, 
the Man is tired and suddenly he looks 
old, very, very old as he turns away from me, the things he cannot dream— 
my brazen plans, my body full of love.



Submission

It begins with Diane—the gold shingles of her razored hair 
alight in the wind that whips the trees, 
the cotton slips pinned to nylon lines: these improbable ghosts. 
The first I ever loved can still incite such desperation. Betrayal 
lashes the careful stitches, the slight fabric; 
its design undone. 
She would take her switchblade and cut spiders in half— 
a quadrant of scars radiating from her wrists and elbows, she wrote my name in blood, 
let matches flare against the cuts 
small yellow head, searing. I used to operate on myself, she said. 
Separate a triangle of skin and place objects—silver pin 
heads, glass beads    close to the bone. 
A private surgical kit, embroidery scissors, alcohol, fine needles, and 
violet thread; silk, cat whiskers tied in complicated bows. She 
remembers this way, where things are 
where they are buried. We studied history together, this is how we met. Recovering the Roman Empire; she draws military disasters in her margins, mail clad horsemen pitching 
violently to the ground, the movement of the cavalry 
a swarm of locusts. Her silver compact slit open, because there are assassins in the narrow hallway; 
her fine pale feet turn to form an arabesque (a delicate design of flowers, 
leaves), furrows in the sheets and mattress, pearls. Ropes of black pearls and a black rubber dress—submerged in the green haze, 
the depths of a nightclub, listening. Submission; she hit his thighs with a chain, a hook in his mouth 
her lips were alluring. Red feather quills, bright red flies. I think of him, brought violently to the surface, his tensile body still below the thin edge of the filleting knife 
his slick flesh streaming as he surrenders—a ceremony of scales and gills, useless to him now, 
as he breathes in and out. She told me once that she was like a scorpion, and I did not listen. 
I let her creep between my fingers, and danger was exotic to me then. I lived somewhere deep beyond the coastline, in the crevices of rocks and wood planks, 
her gold hair spins like loose coins, strange and valuable. The currency of nightmares, where the sun burns the earth and empties the seas—there are skeletons, gingerly reaching for night 
night will fall in a rustle of wings, the gentle sweep of the legs of scorpions.




The Storm

Like people emerging from a steambath,
bending over,
steaming from their heads and shoulders,
the ring of the mountains from the Chilkat Range
to the Juneau ice field
as if in steambath towels of snow flurries;
at their feet are foaming white caps of sea
like water thrown on rocks steaming from the heat.



Roslyn

Roslyn has nothing going
nothing to fight for
no work to do
she couldn’t name one desire
that is not someone else’s
or a man
she cannot claim
where she came from
will not claim who she is
or the way she cries
so no one can see
she has no work to do
cannot finish books
feed herself
or go out alone
she is always late
not to sit alone somewhere
and wait
she wouldn’t know what to do
Roslyn doesn’t want a thing
but she waits for something anyway
she has no work to do
she holds off interests
passions and opinions
everything but the facts
and these come to her
from dramas and the papers
she agrees with fiction
and what people say
i wouldn’t trust her in court
or on my back
a woman without a dream
is a fault in the earth
all steam and liquid fire
Roslyn goes to work
has a job
but no calling
waits for the word
to call herself
no one ever remembers her name
or where they saw her
she waits to be told
she’s the only one
her tyranny is silent
small and sexual
her losses are great
she has not called herself
said, “I’m here, now, deal with me”
Roslyn wouldn’t hurt a fly
but people fear her sleep
her unconscious
the primal whatever
that wants to play
it might have guns out
for the rest of us



skinny-dippin’ in the gene pool

the streets of hell are also paved
with fear of contagion
I have been swimming
in enough barbed-wire waters to know
you’re not even safe on the beach
it’s not just your “body fluids”
it’s the grime of your skin
those dirty things you think
they are cleaning up the world again
I can see the inflammation
heartbreak & hunger scurry me down
on the road to Damascus
I want to be blinded like Saul
for the sake of vision
not just cause I can’t take it anymore
are we talking burnt out here?
burnt out is a reason for infection
I hope I get the whole disease
I am glad to be a speck / a piece of dirt
the dark side of the earth
they’re trying to clean
I want to get in their pores
want them to sweat my filth
the way a wound hurts before the dope
but then come the murderers on the road
are we talking burnt out?
they go in the camps looking for you
cause you are hiding the sores
you could be contagious
after all in the postapocalypse movies
you don’t even exist
your survival is not required
for history or hollywood
in the movie Road Warrior
everyone is antisocial on purpose
human ties are burnt out
& human intercourse is fatiguing & dangerous
gratefully no one is traumatized anymore
& unfortunately no one goes to school
in the movie Blade Runner
almost everyone lives 90 stories below
almost no one else
everyone is antisocial by accident
due to overcrowding in L.A. but no one minds
& there are still parties to go to
everyone white is “off-world” more or less
everyone 90 stories down is polymorphous colored
more or less
no one has attended school in decades
in both films everyone dresses with panache
which preserves their identities
to audiences who know
there is no grounds for indentity
postworld
personally I prefer the people in Titanic
even though they got their minds blown
when the unbelievable happened
they still believed in life
they were not burnt out
& had grounds for clinging
to lifeboats and a certain
stylish way of dressing
they could not imagine Jim Jensen
intoning without horror
that the body count goes on
that no one needs the news to know
what’s going on
Beirut is one of the low levels
Dante went on about
available in ordinary life
see the corpses if you will
believe at the risk
you may see it everywhere
every body spreads infection
unless you burn it out
eyewitness news invites you
to wait for the coverage
because Jim Jensen is there
& history is in the making or
you can come skinny-dip
in my gene pool
the massacres were arbitrary
when my people were hunted down
the deaths still go on
stretching over centuries
of shades of brown
baptist, moslem,
mothers, children, fathers
burnt out of homes but living
I am not that desperate
to be numb & dumb
I’m walking 90 stories down
I know I survive
in some wretched moments
of what men do
but I am not that desperate
I don’t give a shit if this is history
in the making
it should stop
I am still alive
I am still happy to be the dirt
that can’t be cleaned up
scorch my earth & I will grow
from history up
under the feet of the present
burnt out is for the movies
in which we don’t exist



Where the Wound Lies

because I go 
like the professed 
sinner repentant 
to the altar 
of your baptismal flame 
I am saved 
despite your 
sculptor-love 
whose whimsy kneads 
and molds 
and fires
then breaks 
the free-form 
of my fasting body
to make 
me whole
yet thankful 
I accept
these carnal gifts
of you Eros 
and wear them 
as I would
flawless jewels 
(how can you know that I have bled the way and back 
biting the dust to wear your name?) 
. . . the wound lies not in your infliction but in my expectations . . .



The Murder of Beauty / The Beauty of Murder

"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps."
If you knock out my teeth, I'll still go down on you, conscientiously,
vine along a trellis, and suck you with my gums. 
If you smash my toes, employing an ice crusher, one by one,
I'll heal myself with such truancy that someday I'll run on my knees.
"If you cut off my hands, I'll offer you my stumps,"
and orchestrate a standing ovation with the memory of my hands
representing each that are dying, each that are dead,
each forgotten that we refuse to remember like the lost hands of stumps.
So much misery in plain sight like tears streaming down a face;
so much misery hidden like the eventuality of the anti-Christ;
and so much incognito like the accompanying instruments of a torch song:
like the fire in the torch itself, like the torched interior of the song.
If you cut off my ears, I will listen with my eyes
to the spitting death of cavalrymen as they're roasted over an open fire;
to the smallest bones snap, dry as sun-seasoned kindling
of the young and truant witch when she's pressed by a thousand stones;
to the brave convulsions of the communist
strapped in the electric chair, dying by degree...not unlike the commonfolk
plucked from the village, arbitrarily, one last December night,
stripped to the flesh and heaved high into the freezing air
upon a whittled stave, tall and sharp, thrust deep into the asshole
they die by degree, ever so slowly and often only
(if not by freezing first, which, if merciful, God deems)
when the wooden point finally pierces the brain, brain-dead already
from the mauve anticipation and ear-splitting prerequisite of pain.
If you cut out my tongue, I will write you a letter,
a love letter lovelorn for that taste of your tongue.
If you fuck me hard I can never make love again,
I'll plant hyacinth bulbs in an effort to replace my abolished fecundity.
I will turn eternally on my side and pull down my pants
and listen to your masturbate while fantasizing about my ass.
I'll admire the willow out the window when I hear you come
and allow as if in tribute to the times I used to participate,
a vague expression of pleasure, albeit contrived to wash across my face
the way my desire for you, real as a willow, once had done.



The Moon and the Yew Tree

This is the light of the mind, cold and planetary.
The trees of the mind are black. Their irregular branches,
like broken arms backlit from MRI dye, offset by yearning.
They take form in ways only experts can decipher.
The light is blue. The observation of the alien doctor
flickers in his iris, furnace gaslight burning like a pagan memorial.
The grasses unload their griefs on my feet as if I were God,
I pity their need for idolatry. It bares itself only to the void of me,
Prickling my ankles and murmuring of their humility.
I am unable to convince them otherwise.
I hear them mew and compete as if for a rough teat's clear nutrition.
Foolish rule of the organic, uncultured and out of control.
I am mum and tidy as a nun in comparison.
Though capable of devastation are my desires which punish
the landscape with recrimination, uprooting the hedges.
They swallow fire, speak in four languages, and love no one.
I shudder with pride as they push themselves back to their origin,
to the scraped-out bottom of a uterine nothing;
this hard loneliness, skull-solid, pushed back into vagueness
until it succumbs as if overwhelmed by barbiturates. 
Fumy, spiritous mists inhabit this place
Separated from my house by a row of headstones.
Its green vapors trigger an olfactory déjà vu like a recurrent nightmare.
I envy the buried faces finally freed from worry and ailment,
from the pressure to remain always forward-thinking.
I picture their release, the prostrate bodies floating up as if levitated.
What peace, what stillness was shoveled onto their pine box beds
where darkness then dropped, all at once, final as an execution.
I simply cannot see where there is to get to.
The moon is no door. It is a face in its own right,
White as a knuckle and terribly upset. I identify with its nausea.
It meets me in the mirror uninvited, this face beneath my face,
restless and unwilling. It formulates inside me like a kicking fetus
and refuses to be ignored. It haunts and threatens like a past trauma.
It drags the sea after it like a dark crime; mute as a mug shot,
it is quiet, like someone suffocated who suddenly stops struggling.
I recognize in its warm death the expression of the starving
With the O-gape of complete despair. I live here.
Against me a force, not stronger or more intelligent,
but more adaptable to poor weather like dandelions.
I can feel it whittle me down to horse feed pellets.
I'm being winnowed out of the earth's circulation,
with a pairing incremental as this winter's passing.
Twice on Sunday the bells startle the sky—
Eight great tongues affirming the Resurrection.
I'm forced to listen to the liturgical lecturing,
truant student of a catechism I loathe.
At the end, they soberly bong out their names;
Myths and ideals I could never bring myself to believe in,
my prayers, the self-flagellation of unrequited love.
The yew tree points up like a New England steeple.
It has a Gothic shape. It used to remind me of home.
The eyes lift after it and find the moon.
Once fragile as rice paper, it hangs static and tough
like a noose signifying more hardship ahead—
interrogating flashlight that hurts my eyes.
Now no home exists—just an empty bed,
a pile of mangled sheets atop a dark wood floor,
like snow atop the frozen mud tracks of hoof and wheel.
The moon is my mother. She is not sweet like Mary.
She licks her white feathers and stares back with one eye
vicious as a swan about to bite.
Her blue garments unloose small bats and owls.
I watch, my leg caught in the truth of my life
where beyond human emotion I've traveled at this point.
How I would like to believe in tenderness—
in those symbolic unions that elicit sweet concepts:
mother and child, father and daughter, husband and wife.
The face of the effigy, gentled by candles,
its cheekbones flushed with an afterworld favoritism
Bending, on me in particular, its mild eyes;
hair waving, mouth parted in mid-speech like drowned Ophelia.
I have fallen a long way. I lie at the bottom, smashed
like a dinner plate against kitchen tile, china chips and jagged bits.
I lie at the bottom, shattered and dangerous, looking up
with a baby's stunned engrossment. I'm moving closer to Pluto and Mars.
Clouds are flowering blue and mystical over the face of the stars,—
It will not be quick. Death drinks me in, slow as syrup.
Inside the church, the saints will be all blue.
They've ascended into heaven's oxygen-deprived morgue.
Floating on their delicate feet over the cold pews,
Their hands and faces stiff with holiness,
mannequins perennially enacting the nativity in a wax museum.
The moon sees nothing of this. She is bald and wild
as one dying of cancer. She begs for relief, but her pillow-muffled
shrieks disperse with the other sounds and shadows of the night.
We are left alone, her cadaver face, gaunt and grim, prescient of mine.
And the message of the yew tree is blackness—blackness and silence.



The Minks

In the backyard of our house on Norwood, 
there were five hundred steel cages lined up, 
each with a wooden box 
roofed with tar paper; 
inside, two stories, with straw 
for a bed. Sometimes the minks would pace 
back and forth wildly, looking for a way out; 
or else they’d hide in their wooden houses, even when 
we’d put the offering of raw horse meat on their trays, as if 
they knew they were beautiful 
and wanted to deprive us. 
In spring the placid kits 
drank with glazed eyes. 
Sometimes the mothers would go mad 
and snap their necks. 
My uncle would lift the roof like a god 
who might lift our roof, look down on us 
and take us out to safety. 
Sometimes one would escape. 
He would go down on his hands and knees, 
aiming a flashlight like 
a bullet of light, hoping to catch 
the orange gold of its eyes. 
He wore huge boots, gloves 
so thick their little teeth couldn’t bite through. 
“They’re wild,” he’d say. “Never trust them.” 
Each afternoon when I put the scoop of raw meat rich 
with eggs and vitamins on their trays, 
I’d call to each a greeting. 
Their small thin faces would follow as if slightly curious. 
In fall they went out in a van, returning 
sorted, matched, their skins hanging down on huge metal 
hangers, pinned by their mouths. 
My uncle would take them out when company came 
and drape them over his arm—the sweetest cargo. 
He’d blow down the pelts softly 
and the hairs would part for his breath 
and show the shining underlife which, like 
the shining of the soul, gives us each 
character and beauty.



Christmas Eve: My Mother Dressing

My mother was not impressed with her beauty; 
once a year she put it on like a costume, 
plaited her black hair, slick as cornsilk, down past her hips, 
in one rope-thick braid, turned it, carefully, hand over hand, 
and fixed it at the nape of her neck, stiff and elegant as a crown, 
with tortoise pins, like huge insects, 
some belonging to her dead mother, 
some to my living grandmother. 
Sitting on the stool at the mirror, 
she applied a peachy foundation that seemed to hold her down, to trap her, 
as if we never would have noticed what flew among us unless it was weighted and bound in its mask. 
Vaseline shined her eyebrows, 
mascara blackened her lashes until they swept down like feathers; 
her eyes deepened until they shone from far away. 
Now I remember her hands, her poor hands, which, even then were old from scrubbing, 
whiter on the inside than they should have been, 
and hard, the first joints of her fingers, little fattened pads, 
the nails filed to sharp points like old-fashioned ink pens, 
painted a jolly color. 
Her hands stood next to her face and wanted to be put away, prayed 
for the scrub bucket and brush to make them useful. 
And, as I write, I forget the years I watched her 
pull hairs like a witch from her chin, magnify 
every blotch—as if acid were thrown from the inside. 
But once a year my mother 
rose in her white silk slip, 
not the slave of the house, the woman, 
took the ironed dress from the hanger— 
allowing me to stand on the bed, so that 
my face looked directly into her face, 
and hold the garment away from her 
as she pulled it down.


Song for Baby-O, Unborn

Sweetheart
when you break thru you’ll find a poet here
not quite what one would choose.
I won’t promise you’ll never go hungry or that you won’t be sad on this gutted breaking globe
but I can show you baby enough to love to break your heart forever



The Window

you are my bread
and the hairline noise of my bones 
you are almost the sea
you are not stone or molten sound
I think you have no hands
this kind of bird flies backward
and this love breaks on a windowpane where no light talks
this is not time for crossing tongues
(the sand here never shifts)
I think tomorrow turned you with his toe
and you will shine and shine unspent and underground



The River of Girls

This is not really myth or secret.
This murmur in the mouth 
of the mountain where the sound
of rain is born. This surging
past pilgrim town and village well.
This coin-thin vagina
and acid stain of bone.
This doctor with his rusty tools,
this street cleaner, this mother
laying down the bloody offerings
of birth. This is not the cry
of a beginning, or a river
buried in the bowels of the earth.
This is the sound of ten million girls
singing of a time in the universe
when they were born with tigers
breathing between their thighs;
when they set out for battle
with all three eyes on fire,
their golden breasts held high
like weapons to the sky.



The Immigrant's Song

Let us not speak of those days 
when coffee beans filled the morning 
with hope, when our mothers' headscarves 
hung like white flags on washing lines. 
Let us not speak of the long arms of sky 
that used to cradle us at dusk. 
And the baobabs—let us not trace 
the shape of their leaves in our dreams, 
or yearn for the noise of those nameless birds 
that sang and died in the church's eaves. 
Let us not speak of men, 
stolen from their beds at night. 
Let us not say the word
disappeared.
Let us not remember the first smell of rain. 
Instead, let us speak of our lives now—
the gates and bridges and stores.
And when we break bread
in cafés and at kitchen tables
with our new brothers,
let us not burden them with stories
of war or abandonment.
Let us not name our old friends
who are unravelling like fairy tales
in the forests of the dead.
Naming them will not bring them back.
Let us stay here, and wait for the future
to arrive, for grandchildren to speak
in forked tongues about the country
we once came from.
Tell us about it, they might ask.
And you might consider telling them 
of the sky and the coffee beans, 
the small white houses and dusty streets. 
You might set your memory afloat 
like a paper boat down a river. 
You might pray that the paper 
whispers your story to the water, 
that the water sings it to the trees, 
that the trees howl and howl 
it to the leaves. If you keep still 
and do not speak, you might hear 
your whole life fill the world 
until the wind is the only word.



Warming Her Pearls

Next to my own skin, her pearls. My mistress 
bids me wear them, warm them, until evening 
when I'll brush her hair. At six, I place them 
round her cool, white throat. All day I think of her,
resting in the Yellow Room, contemplating silk 
or taffeta, which gown tonight? She fans herself 
whilst I work willingly, my slow heat entering 
each pearl. Slack on my neck, her rope.
She's beautiful. I dream about her
in my attic bed; picture her dancing
with tall men, puzzled by my faint, persistent scent
beneath her French perfume, her milky stones.
I dust her shoulders with a rabbit's foot, 
watch the soft blush seep through her skin 
like an indolent sigh. In her looking-glass 
my red lips part as though I want to speak.
Full moon. Her carriage brings her home. I see 
her every movement in my head.... Undressing, 
taking off her jewels, her slim hand reaching 
for the case, slipping naked into bed, the way
she always does.... And I lie here awake, 
knowing the pearls are cooling even now 
in the room where my mistress sleeps. All night 
I feel their absence and I burn.



[even when issues arise . . .]

even when issues arise and obedience can not be secured by the bludgeon, the bludgeon remains; when we mention the people, we do not mean the confessional body of the people, we mean particularly itinerant bodies in mechanic flux, preaching freedom beyond flesh pamphlets of authority, concealed in blind devotion. when we mean the people, we mean a people knowing their own strength cast as day laborers, or knowing to a greater part of a lesser known part playing paid intercourse in all connections for the people by the people. when we mean, we mean broke or abrasive worn, once open scream representatives, now incarcerated in a rationalistic shadow land, given a history that merges extruder merchandising with wholesale lots of intermittent dung, or objects for understudy beatings.



[the day shifts . . .]

the day shifts, we talk to each other the way we talk to each other, the luster fades, our bodies fill with sap, there is a shift, joy reappears before another personal narrative burns to a heap of citations, continuing in complicated machinery, becoming blood knots in space, both the living and dead surround the present has been. I open my eyes in the full force of fear and hesitation, frozen in passing passageways with endless permutations, subjected to violence, stupidity, and love.



The Gulf of California

There are two memories of tides:
one for the deep blackness that split
away from the mother sea
and one for sea that found itself
in the daybreaks of rivers.
Yet it was all one sea
tracked by comets and the Elegant Tern,
seals in speckled pod-shaped skins,
and whales, opening their small eyes
when the hands of people drew fish
out of the salt.
Geologists tell us that the sea split
millions of years ago
before the Yoemem, Yoremem,
Kunkaak, O-Otam
curled their tongues around the names
of themselves and raised the conch shell 
to their lips, so that the sound of nature
became human, too:
kalifornia vaawe
Then the sea was measured
and divided into leagues.
The Spanish ships called it dangerous
because the sea tore in two ways,
tide and rivers,
so they contained it in maps
written on dead animal skins
with ink made from dried octopus blood
Mar de la Kalifornia
Golfo de California
Then it was named the Vermilion Sea
when the red-shelled crabs clicked in the waters.
It was the Sea of Cortés
because it’s the right of the Conqueror
to claim the world in his name.
It’s his right to name hunger after himself
and to take away rivers
and children
and to give back the bare bones
of life
in the Queen’s name.
What can you say about men
who name the mountains “mother”
madre
when the worst curse they can shout
defiles their mother
in the act of creation?
Now we call the Gulf of California
polluted
with the pesticides of fields
and the wastes of factories.
And the voices of the fin-backed whale,
sardines, sea-kelp, anemone,
and turtle are quieter,
so that we have less memory
of the way it was
and less hope
for the way it will be.
In the winter I eat strawberries
from Mexico
and oranges, sectioned and split
apart
on my north continental plate.
I don’t know much about my relatives
picking the fields near Bacum, Torim.
I don’t know much about the spiny sea urchin,
except that it knows more than I
about the sea, the sea that names itself
unnameable
movable horizon.



Last Snow

Dumped wet and momentary on a dull ground
that’s been clear but clearly sleeping, for days.
Last snow melts as it falls, piles up slush, runs in first light
making a music in the streets we wish we could keep.
Last snow. That’s what we’ll think for weeks to come.
Close sun sets up a glare that smarts like a good cry.
We could head north and north and never let this season go.
Stubborn beast, the body reads the past in the change of light,
knows the blow of grief in the time of trees’ tight-fisted leaves.
Stubborn calendar of bone. Last snow. Now it must always be so.



Geburt des Monicakinds

I woke. A tiny knot of skin on a silver table
Set in the birth-theater, blinking in the glare
Of electric lights and a strange arranged
Passel of faces: huge as gods in their council.
I was the actor who forgets his lines and enters
On stage suddenly wanting to say, I am.
I was almost all eye: they weighed me down,
Two lump-big brown-sugar bags in a face
Which did not yet know struggle, burden;
How the look of newborns unnerves. Then
They wrapped me in pale yellow like a new sun
Still too small to throw up into the sky.
It was midnight when they injected me
With a plague; tamed, faded as imperialism, pox
Had once put its palm-leaf hand over a quarter of Earth
Saying, these. Now it was contracted to a drop:
And in the morning I knew both death and life.
Lapped in my nimbus of old gold light, my 
Huge lashes drooped over my deepened eyes, like
Ostrich-feather shades over twin crown princes: wet heads
Sleek and doomed as the black soul of an open poppy.




Myths of the Disappearance

I rise like a red balloon, untethered and vacant.
The essence of my dolor has become rarefied,
Holy; like a fragrance, bodiless, without referent.
It is pale shadow on the sun, a wasp’s-wing, accidental
Splash of poison on the white rose’s thorn—
I twist it in my fingers and faint. Shall I tell you?
There was one bad fairy at my birth, there came one curse,
One blister, one drop of mercury in the moult of me
And everything was ruined after.
Still it is
No good; the words drift from me like ashes.
I am so old now, I have left half my life
In caves hollowed out in rock by the seashore:
I prayed in each one, and could not find my way back,
Or lied when the pass-word was asked, or turned my back,
Making gestures of despondency at the roiling surf.
In a mirror I shot all my hateful selves, the yesterdays.



My Raptor

My mind hovered over my baby, like 
a raptor, and froze everything it saw. 
I looked through my own pregnant belly's raw 
perimeters and found his heart to strike 
attentive until, helpless with the pound 
of still more blood, he seemed to settle down. 
It was my loss to feel like god alone 
for a new one always listening, to reach 
inside for his ears to share the flying speech 
I heard so constantly. Within my grown 
silence, my sounding, my loud body where 
the baby turned, my mind learned not to care 
whether thoughts I felt he noticed with no fear 
were mine alone—or whether he could hear.



Strangers

She turned to gold and fell in love. 
She danced life upside down. 
She opened her wild eyes again 
and asked some strangers in. 
The strangers felt her in and out. 
They found her outsides thin. 
Since her heart was still and hard, 
they knocked her insides in. 



Heft

and hue 
to have unheld a scale— 
silver dishes little mirrors on their chains— 
they go that way, This and hoist 
It’s not like looking into a pool, 
to let your intelligence run away with you 
Come back quarter size, apricot moon 
A changeling is a child who 
appeared under cover 
of the ordinary, in exchange 
The morning came 
I have such pretty handwriting 
no one said but I myself thought it 
to myself so I matted it 
like the grasses or a canvas or some 
uncombed hair. It became a mess 
which was the research of where things go. 
A child could figure it out 
if there is such a thing as “out” 
in the sense of being figured in 
the thinking was like Origami, 
everyone folded out of birds, into specific 
kinds of birds 
I call you       
hickory 
category 
dot



Hunter's Moon

Early December, dusk, and the sky 
slips down the rungs of its blue ladder 
into indigo. A late-quarter moon hangs 
in the air above the ridge like a broken plate 
and shines on us all, on the new deputy 
almost asleep in his four-by-four, 
lulled by the crackling song of the dispatcher, 
on the bartender, slowly wiping a glass 
and racking it, one eye checking the game. 
It shines down on the fox’s red and grey life, 
as he stills, a shadow beside someone’s gate, 
listening to winter. Its pale gaze caresses 
the lovers, curled together under a quilt, 
dreaming alone, and shines on the scattered 
ashes of terrible fires, on the owl’s black flight, 
on the whelks, on the murmuring kelp, 
on the whale that washed up six weeks ago 
at the base of the dunes, and it shines 
on the backhoe that buried her.



Winter Sun

How valuable it is in these short days, 
threading through empty maple branches, 
the lacy-needled sugar pines.
Its glint off sheets of ice tells the story 
of Death’s brightness, her bitter cold.
We can make do with so little, just the hint 
of warmth, the slanted light.
The way we stand there, soaking in it, 
mittened fingers reaching.
And how carefully we gather what we can 
to offer later, in darkness, one body to another.



Moraine for Bob

You were never a man 
in the television sense of the word.
I was never a wild Slinky 
in the sex-club sense of a toy.
You were never a tobacco store 
in the Modernist sense of a trope.
I was never a snowdrop 
in the candy store sense of a treat. 
You were never Day-glo 
in the fashionista sense of a scarf. 
I was never withyouallthetime
in the username sense of a self. 
You were never a strumpet 
in the toothache sense of an insult. 
I was never a tooting horn 
in the childhood sense of a game. 
You were never a hole-in-my-heart   
in the country singer sense of a vista. 
I was never a paper doll 
in the pyromaniac sense of a pal. 
You were never a parenthesis 
in the phony secret sense of a sign. 
I was never red lipstick 
in the pulp novel sense of a threat. 
You were never a word 
in the mystic sense of an obstacle. 
I was never a shaking castanet   
in the midnight sense of a song.




New Eyes for the New Year

The eyes on a face have brought me sadness: 
the right eye searching for seams in ripped fishnets; 
the left eye lost and wandering the dark; the eye 
of the baby god crawling behind a couch in the moist 
suburb where we planned our escape from video games 
and grilled cheese; the eye of a whale we met in a dream 
who spit us out so we could make the 8 o’clock screening 
of On Golden Pond; the eye of the clock, blinking
when the oboe wailed like a burning shofar; the eye
inside the eye, curled up—a sprouting lima bean, 
remembering the nineteenth century, those rosy drapes;
the eyes of missing finger tips, of sad afternoons 
in French cafés in Dayton, Ohio; the eyes on the very 
real parrot who sits on the shoulders of a wax actor
dressed as a pirate; the eyes of an actress, pretending 
to be my mom; the eyes of my father, sleeping on a train, 
dreaming about miniature crashing planes; the eyes 
of a swimming pool, looking up or down everyone’s
swimsuits and into their souls; the eyes in love 
songs written by mean men; the eyes in the painting 
lost in a fire where we tried to save the ancient cat;
the eyes underneath tap shoes clicking like teeth; 
the eyes of Fred Astaire, never blinking, even to kiss
in the dark; the eyes of the state of Texas secretly
tattooed on everyone’s ass, and the eyes on the billboard, 
ripped and faded from rain like the eyes of the best waitress
on the Upper West Side who knows everyone’s order, 
even those of customers she’s never met. 
Can you hear  the eyes under my eyes? 
They steal other people’s dreams to use them for ad copy. 
Here are the eyes of a man who’d be my husband if he
hadn’t married my twin, and there are the eyes of the judge 
who divorced them, blue as his tie. I forget the eye color 
of the first man I loved—what color was my hat when we cried
in the snow? The whites of everyone’s eyes swirl together
in silent music. Nothing like the closed eyes of a flamenco dancer, 
eating a dripping hamburger by the highway. Instead it is 
the right eye of a teacher when she touches her student; 
the eyes inside my mouth and the eyes outside your mouth;
the eyes of the writer and reader, a broken vase and a whole petal; 
the eyes on what you thought of as a cunt and the eyes 
on what I thought of as a cock; the small eyes on the open book 
and the bigger eyes of the closed book; the eyes I swallow 
when we talk, and the eyes that fly above us in sleep.




In Perpetual Spring

Gardens are also good places 
to sulk. You pass beds of 
spiky voodoo lilies   
and trip over the roots   
of a sweet gum tree,   
in search of medieval   
plants whose leaves,   
when they drop off   
turn into birds 
if they fall on land, 
and colored carp if they   
plop into water. 
Suddenly the archetypal   
human desire for peace   
with every other species   
wells up in you. The lion   
and the lamb cuddling up. 
The snake and the snail, kissing. 
Even the prick of the thistle,   
queen of the weeds, revives   
your secret belief 
in perpetual spring, 
your faith that for every hurt   
there is a leaf to cure it.



The Ice Age

A million years ago the earth grew cold. Iowa was covered by twenty-five hundred feet of ice. No one knows why the glaciers formed and spread, or why they eventually retreated. 
I blinked and you were gone. 
As a boy, he loved the idea of the ice age. Lumbering woolly mammoths and giant sloths. Outside, a vast white edict erasing the landscape. Inside his head, cave paintings of bison leapt in the firelight, their horns spiraling upward, the tips smoking. 
Men on skis came to dig you out. Though they worked all night, they were too late. 
Waking every day the frost reasserts itself. Its relentlessness a tedium, a closure. The earth must have looked more familiar when all was water. We don’t recognize ourselves amidst this overwhelming winter: static that censors newscasts, cold that burns, incessant dripping as icicles perfect themselves. The night skies are a riot of Chinese silk: bolts of crimson and shadow-blue. The radio crackles faintly. 
Medical refuse litters the beaches, spews into the water from a backed up sewer under the pier. Bacteria cavort in the seawater. The weather’s gone haywire all over the globe. The more sensitive you are the earlier you’ll die. Just hold your breath a little longer, dear. 
Once you start this medication, you can’t stop. Your life changes. You decide, based on a dearth of information, which force you want to submit to: nature, now less maternal than ever, or her idiot son—modern medicine.
You make an effort to find some grand design in this blindness. If you can’t see well enough anymore to edit your film, perhaps you can still do the music. You set an example. 
Lemme outa here. 
As a boy, before his mother found out and made him stop, he’d bury the frozen birds he found on the porch after big storms by warming the earth first with his father’s blowtorch. 
Being human, we can’t help attempting to arrange events into patterns—the way a sick man sees faces in the stains on his bedroom ceiling. He names them. Months later, they all converse. 
The men in the ice-covered radio station play cards and drink bourbon. 
What defense can one mount against an avalanche? 
Spotless beakers, pipettes, rows of small cages. Welcome to the lab. Here’s the chamber where we run preliminary screenings. Better don these gloves. Why not use two pair, like me? The new man on the night shift nods off over his work, with the radio playing. Its tinny strands of music enter his dream disguised as a dead friend’s hair. He had short coarse hair, like a terrier’s, pleasantly stiff to the touch. The lab is brightly lit to ward off the backwash of night. Under the table the research assistant’s feet twitch spasmodically in his sleep. 
A series of blurry black-and-white newsreels flickers on the screen. Martian canals overflow their banks. A lake in Africa exhales a cloud of poison gas, killing thousands of villagers on its shores. Venice sinks. Anchorage, Alaska, is leveled by earthquakes. Pompeii is breaded and fried by its volcano. The swamp swallows another sand bar, then coughs up a tiny island. Subzero temperatures paralyze Acapulco. There have been several ice ages, a female narrator intones. The most recent lasted 90,000 years. A timer goes off and the lab assistant jerks awake. In about the time it takes to drink a glass of water, he remembers where he is. 
“This is probably the last time I will write to you . . .”   
The rocks applaud. Summers turn short and cool. The world remakes itself without us now.



Photo of a Girl on a Beach

Once when I was harmless
and didn’t know any better,
a mirror to the front of me
and an ocean behind,
I lay wedged in the middle of daylight,
paper-doll thin, dreaming,
then I vanished. I gave the day a fingerprint,
then forgot.
I sat naked on a towel
on a hot June Monday.
The sun etched the inside of my eyelids,
while a boy dozed at my side.
The smell of all oceans was around us—
steamy salt, shell, and sweat,
but I reached for the distant one.
A tide rose while I slept,
and soon I was alone. Try being
a figure in memory. It’s hollow there.
For truth’s sake, I’ll say she was on a beach
and her eyes were closed.
She was bare in the sand, long,
and the hour took her bit by bit.




Déjà Vu

It happened to me once.
Winter came, and snow quilted every inch.
I stood on the soapbox, as I was told,
and made staggering accusations. The public ignored,
so I retreated behind the potted yew.
I was waiting for a moment I was supposed to have
on a balcony overlooking the giant, gridded landscape.
The sounds I made underscored what I meant.
The potted yew was the face that I wore.
It was a metaphor for what could be.
The public endured.
I put the potted yew behind me. I made staggering an art.
That wasn’t the truth though. Winter
comes and negates all it covers. It doesn’t matter where I stand.
The balcony is a floor without walls.
The yew is a hurt that shadows.
The instance lives beneath us. Not just us, everybody.
The shadow hurts us. I make sounds like
the truth. Fate and theft are involved.
I think I told you this before. The floor is a wall that obscures.
The yew is quilt without color. Shadow is a fate you involved.
The yew on a balcony negates. I told you this before.
I was left undone. It’s what I meant. Underneath everyone.



Through the “I” of the Needle

The peach is a belly dancer's fruit. 
It has a navel eye for seeing the world through the skin,
rounded buttocks good to place against the hand
the way earth reminds flesh of its being. 
Through the eye of the needle,
death is a country where people wonder and worry what it's like to live. 
The sullen wish to live and live soon
to be done with death 
and the happy want to stay dead forever
wondering will it hurt to live
and is there death after death?
